## Chapter IV - Gould Expands the Erie

Hardly had railroad men, investors, speculators, and bankers comprehended the stirring events of October and November, than Gould suddenly appeared in a new corner of the business world. Again he did the unexpected, again he appeared as an unsettling factor, again he adopted bold methods to carry out his objectives, and again he stirred up violent opposition to the use of such methods. The three New York and Philadelphia railroad trunk lines to Pittsburgh and Buffalo did not then wholly own or control their western connections. Informal understandings and written traffic contracts regulated the relations between the eastern lines and their western connections. There was little corporate control in the form of stockholdings and interlocking directors. There were four major traffic routes over which business moved between Philadelphia, New York, and the West. A brief sketch of these traffic routes is essential to an understanding of Gould's moves in December, 1868, and in the early months of 1869.

On the southern lake shore, a number of local roads connected Buffalo with Chicago. From Buffalo to Erie, from Erie to Cleveland, from Cleveland to Toledo, and from Toledo to Chicago, independent lines operated. These roads could form a through route and trade with the New York Central, or the Erie at Buffalo, or with the Atlantic at some point west of Buffalo.

To the south of this route lay the Atlantic—the road which had begun operations under such auspicious circumstances. Even though the road in December, 1868, lay in receivership, it had excellent traffic connections, and still moved much of the oil business from the oil region in northwestern Pennsylvania. It connected with the Erie in southwestern New York, and with other roads through which it reached the lines of the Pennsylvania Railroad. A third route, operating west from Pittsburgh, was owned by the Fort Wayne. In 1857 the road became financially embarrassed, and the Pennsylvania, in return for its aid, received more than a million dollars of the Fort Wayne's bonds, and a substantial block of its stock. In receivership the stock sold at about $8 a share, and the Pennsylvania would have had little difficulty in acquiring a controlling interest at this price.

The Pennsylvania's financial managers, however, lacked the imagination necessary to conceive of a railroad system as a national enterprise. In a spirit of commendable prudence the board refrained from expansion, and refused to increased its debt. In 1864, for example, the directors informed the shareholders that they had "kept steadily in view their original reluctance to incur a debt for the construction of their road. ..." Far from adding to its holdings in the Fort Wayne securities, the Pennsylvania by 1866 had liquidated its entire commitment. The Fort Wayne, meanwhile, had become a profitable enterprise.

Despite a written understanding concerning traffic interchange with the Pennsylvania, the Fort Wayne's management had become increasingly independent. At the height of the war inflation in 1863, the Fort Wayne discovered that the traffic was too heavy for the Pennsylvania to carry away eastbound, and that its capacity for moving this business exceeded that of the Pennsylvania. If, insisted the Fort Wayne management, the Pennsylvania could not increase its capacity in order to take care of these cars, then it would have to seek additional facilities via the Lake Shore route. Aside from its ownership of a short route to Chicago, the value of the Fort Wayne to the Pennsylvania lay in its command of all but one of the entrances into Pittsburgh from the south and west, and this entrance was, strategically speaking, the least important.

The Fort Wayne operated in close harmony with another line—the Cleveland & Pittsburgh—which gave it an entrance into the oil refineries of Cleveland. The company, after an early receivership, was also profitable.

The fourth and most southern route connecting with the eastern trunk lines was partly controlled by the Pennsylvania. From Pittsburgh to Columbus the line was owned by a company incorporated in 1868—known as the Panhandle—as a successor in reorganization to a number of others which had been aided by the Pennsylvania. The line from Columbus to Chicago was owned by a number of other companies. In 1868 these were pieced together and merged into a new company, the Columbus, Chicago & Indiana Central. The promoter of this combination was an Ohio banker, B. E. Smith, a man who in the sixties and seventies was an active figure in the mid-western railroad industry. The road could be used for a Chicago extension either by the Pennsylvania or by the Erie. Smith appreciated the road's strategic position, and was ready to listen to offers.

The Indiana Central, in conjunction with the Toledo, Peoria & Warsaw, offered the Pennsylvania also a short line between the East and the Mississippi River gateways. According to the management of the Peoria, the Pennsylvania in 1868 was about to organize the southern Panhandle-Indiana Central line into a new through route, and to perfect the route it had already spent about $2,000,000. Through the Indiana Central, and via a number of leases and bond guarantees, the Pennsylvania controlled a line to St. Louis.

Through the use of the northern Fort Wayne route and the southern Columbus route, the Pennsylvania therefore had outlets to Pittsburgh, Columbus, Indianapolis, St. Louis, and Chicago. In 1868 it was the only railroad with such connections. Here, therefore, were four avenues for the movement of through traffic by the three eastern trunk lines: the New York Central, Pennsylvania and the Erie. Gould, in December, 1868, conceived the idea of seizing control of all these western routes. At this time Gould's activities were presumably concentrated on the Erie. The judicial battles over the injunctions and counter-injunctions were still raging, and leading New York papers were devoting columns to the details. To Gould, however, these details were history. Well supplied with funds realized from the transactions reviewed in the previous chapter, he was prepared to battle the Pennsylvania and the New York Central. The Atlantic had been in receivership for more than a year. McHenry, meanwhile, had decided to push his rate-cutting policy. With tariffs reduced to a fraction of existing figures, he believed that he could run so many trains that the track would be almost constantly occupied. To accomplish this, however, he needed the co-operation of the Erie, while Gould, in charge of the Erie, needed the Atlantic. Early in December, 1868, the Erie made a twelve-year lease of the Atlantic. The property was then in receivership, and to withdraw it from court jurisdiction required $1,600,000. The Erie advanced this amount on the annual rental account, and the receivership was lifted.

When the lease was made, the Erie was burdened with a heavy floating debt. Despite the fact that the New York State Assembly called upon Gould to reveal the Erie's current obligations, he succeeded in avoiding the issue. This debt, he informed the state legislators, was "so fluctuating and uncertain from day to day ... that it [was] impossible to state the amount with any degree of accuracy." McHenry, the largest stockholder of the Atlantic, was convinced, though he was not in the secrets of the Erie, that "large profits [were] likely to result to the Erie proprietors from the natural development under combined administration," and that the whole Erie traffic would be given to the Atlantic. He even expressed the surprising judgment that the Erie under Gould's leadership had charged operating expenses for capital improvements, and had thereby understated its earnings. If, he wrote, the Erie would abandon, as the New York Central and others had done, "the vicious system which [had] for many years governed the railways of America, of applying revenue to capital purposes ... then it would be easy for it to fairly and faithfully make large and continuous dividends, ..."

McHenry, in leasing the Atlantic to the Erie, was convinced that he had prospects of increased returns. If, under the lease, the road earned more than the guaranteed rental, his stock might get a dividend. Although McHenry had hopes, Gould had realities; for he, on behalf of the Erie, controlled the policies of McHenry's Atlantic. With the leased line under his control, Gould had connections with all western routes. He could move in many directions and strike at vital points on almost all of the western routes. Late in December he took a train west. He came well advertised as the head of a group of eastern capitalists with large sums at their disposal. He struck his first blow at the Pennsylvania. The latter had just concluded a contract with the Fort Wayne to send its Chicago business over that line, and the Indiana Central, having thus lost the Pennsylvania's business, was willing to listen to the siren song of the Erie. Smith, president of the Indiana Central, was ready to trade, and quickly accepted the Gould bid for the stock of the road. Since it was agreed that the Erie should only lease the road, the agreement did not require Gould and the Erie to raise any funds. The contract was concluded with the directors of Smith's road to become effective only upon ratification by the stockholders. The Erie agreed to pay interest on the lessor's bonds and a dividend of 7 per cent on its stock.

The lease broke up the Pennsylvania's southern route to Chicago at Columbus, and weakened the Pennsylvania in competition with the Erie. The Pennsylvania management was aroused and forthwith abandoned its cautious expansion policy. Apparently under the influence of the expansionist in its management, Thomas A. Scott, it outbid Gould and the Erie. The Pennsylvania raced to the Indiana Central's stockholders, and before the end of January the latter rejected the lease made by the directors. They accepted a proposal to lease the road jointly to the Pennsylvania Railroad and one of its affiliates. The terms were favorable to the lessor, and the price of its stock jumped from 40 to 90.

That the Pennsylvania acted defensively, without any knowledge of the leased property, is evident from the subsequent history of the lease contract. The Pennsylvania, upon assuming control, found the road "contrary to expectations, to be, to a considerable extent, in an unfinished and dilapidated condition, deficient in depot accommodations, with a limited rolling-stock largely out of repair, and shops entirely inadequate to place this machinery in good order."

The Pennsylvania later tried to avoid some of the obligations imposed by the contract. In 1875 it defaulted on the lessor's bonds, and the company fell into receivership. To a leading metropolitan daily, this default struck "a serious blow at the value of the bonds of every leased railroad in the country"; and the Pennsylvania's attempted justification of the default was characterized as a "flimsy pretense." After prolonged litigation the Pennsylvania finally concluded a contract which made life between the two corporations more harmonious.

While the Pennsylvania was negotiating with the stockholders of the Indiana Central to undo Gould's work, Gould suddenly struck a blow at one of its other connections—the Cleveland & Pittsburgh. The stock of that road was not closely held, and its control could not be acquired by negotiations with one man; a different technique had to be used. His sense of financial ingenuity, as usual, provided him with the necessary weapons. He first bought a large block of stock, not, be it observed, for the account of the Erie but for his personal account. What price the Erie would pay he would decide later. He could not, however, buy enough stock to control the election. The price of the stock was high, and to buy a majority of the stock quickly would probably elevate the price excessively. To get more votes at the forthcoming stockholders' meeting in January, he therefore took another step. There were many stockholders who, although refusing to sell their stock, wanted dividends and price appreciation—not voting power. They therefore sold their proxies. No serious study of the proxy market has ever been made, and even now little is known of the subject. In 1868 proxy selling was general, especially in England, and Gould, in his search for weak spots in the armor of corporate finance, seized upon the proxy market. For a few thousand dollars he secured a large voting power with which, in the language of a group on the Cleveland & Pittsburgh board that set out to defeat his machinations, he could "upset the value of property" in which he had a small pecuniary interest.

At the annual stockholders' meeting of the road on January 6, 1869, Gould was set for his fight for control. He presented a series of resolutions. One resolution authorized a scrip dividend of 15 per cent; and another a cash dividend of 2 per cent on the scrip dividend. Still another authorized the issue of $1,000,000 convertible bonds to be sold at not less than 80; another abrogated the existing by-laws; another appointed an executive committee to make new by-laws, and to perform all corporate actions between sessions of the board without reporting to the board; while another appointed Lane, one of the big three of the Erie's executive committee, as financial agent of the road with the right to hold all of the company's securities and funds without bond; and still another, as a grand climax, appropriated $500,000 to be placed in the hands of Lane to pay attorney's fees and "to be otherwise used as he might deem expedient."

To make matters even more confusing, the majority of the board as soon as organized appointed one of its members as secretary; and then excluded the secretary from the meeting. When the board adjourned, the secretary was given the resolutions to take with him without placing them upon record. Finally the board resolved, after adjournment, that it would meet again only upon the call of the president and with the approval of the financial agent. Since Gould with his own stock and the purchased proxies controlled a majority of the votes, all the resolutions passed.

But, alas for Gould, he had not succeeded in securing control of the Ohio judiciary. In the state of Ohio he had no Judge Barnard, and against an independent judge, Gould was helpless. An opposition party, headed by the road's president, J. N. McCullough, was immediately formed. The president appealed to the court, and a few days after the stockholders' meeting, the court granted an injunction against the new board and appointed a receiver. The court also enjoined the directors, the executive committee, the financial agent and the treasurer, from performing any official act. Gould was beaten and ready for a compromise. As the first step, his personally selected slate, the so-called "Erie board," resigned, and an executive committee consisting of the presidents of the Erie, the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, and the Fort Wayne, together with Samuel Tilden—the Democratic political figure—was appointed to decide all questions in dispute. Despite resort to court action, and the bitterness engendered by Gould's tactics, the differences between the two groups were adjusted. The compromise board included Tilden and also George W. Cass, president of the Fort Wayne. McCullough was re-elected president, and though Gould was elected treasurer, he was not the controlling factor in the road's destinies. He had no executive committee to do his bidding, but he did, nevertheless, exert some influence. He was able, for example, to induce the board to give the Erie the right to reach Cleveland over its tracks.

Gould thus failed to capture the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, thereby tasting defeat twice in rapid succession. This road, as well as the Indiana Central, controlled considerable traffic. In January, 1869, when Gould controlled both, he diverted traffic from their existing eastern connections to the Erie, thereby swelling the latter's gross revenue. For years the road's gross had stood still, but in early 1869, due to its new western connections, the Erie, according to Gould, brought more freight into New York than the New York Central and the Pennsylvania combined.

The big traffic prizes, however, were not these lines. The Fort Wayne and the independent lines forming the route along the southern lake shore were the major carriers. Since the stock of some of the roads was closely held, it was difficult to buy control of the shore route. One company was controlled by a Cleveland group represented by Amasa Stone and H. B. Payne, Cleveland capitalists, while Vanderbilt controlled another. Gould was buying stock of still another—the Michigan Southern—owning the line from Toledo to Chicago. He was also buying into the Toledo, Wabash & Western, connecting the shore route at Toledo with the rich grain fields of the Middle West.

The corporate destiny of the Fort Wayne, however, was still uncertain; no group had yet acquired control. The favorable relations of this road and the Pennsylvania growing out of the traffic contract in December, 1868, were converted into hostility by the Pennsylvania's lease of the Indiana Central in the following month. The Fort Wayne's management in its annual report for 1868 stated that this lease gave the Pennsylvania "an alternative route to Chicago in which she has a very large sum of money invested, and upon such terms (for the present at least) as must make the officers of that Company very solicitous to augment the business of their new acquisition." Reference was made also to the aid given by the Pennsylvania to the project for the construction of a competitive, parallel line to St. Louis.

Because of these strained relationships, Gould saw an opportunity to gain control of the Fort Wayne. To the Pennsylvania this road was the grand traffic prize of the West, and for some months, according to press reports, the Pennsylvania had been negotiating for some interest in the property. In the early summer of 1868, committees of both roads had conferred, and in the fall an agreement was reached. Cass of the Fort Wayne, however, put the document away in the safe to await his chances for the governorship of the state. The Erie, even before the Gould control period, had also been negotiating. Cass was a shrewd bargainer and Gould recognized that if he desired control of the road he could make little headway by dealing directly with its board or its executives. The stock was widely distributed, much of it being owned in England. Negotiations with the stockholders were likely to be prolonged, and Gould had to act quickly. Gould, furthermore, did not control sufficient funds to buy the stock selling at high prices. He knew the Pennsylvania could outbid him and the Erie in a competitive fight for control. It had already taken away the Indiana Central and could probably repeat with the Fort Wayne. Since the annual meeting would soon be held, Gould had to use surprise tactics and act quickly. He decided therefore to use the proxy market.

His activities in the market did not go unnoticed. In mid-January, shortly after the Cleveland & Pittsburgh imbroglio, the Fort Wayne management issued a warning to its stockholders. They were publicly advised to hold their proxies, and in any event, to give them only to proper parties; as, "from present appearances, a desperate attempt [will] be made by other parties to wrest control of the road by the cheap method of purchasing proxies."

By mid-February Gould was prepared. He had enough proxies to insure control. Both the Fort Wayne and the Pennsylvania managements now sensed the danger, and both recognized their mutual interest. The Pennsylvania without the Fort Wayne might lose its most valuable Chicago connection, and suffer from new competition in the rapidly growing Pittsburgh area. Through traffic moving east over the Fort Wayne to Philadelphia might thereafter move over the Erie to New York. The Fort Wayne was originally laid out to connect with Philadelphia, and only about 10 per cent of its profits came from its New York traffic. The capture of this road by the Gould-Erie group would substantially increase the Fort Wayne business moving to New York.

Cass of the Fort Wayne had met Gould on the battlefield of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, and he did not want him to exercise any control over his road. The Fort Wayne was built to serve the state of Pennsylvania, and did not want its freight diverted to New York City.

The battle was soon joined. Cass, as well as Scott of the Pennsylvania, had assets of which Gould knew little. Though Gould had some influence in the New York Legislature, when compared with that of Cass and Scott of the Pennsylvania Legislature, it was relatively slight. Scott's position is well illustrated in an apt story. A member of the legislature of Pennsylvania, it was reported, once rose and moved to adjourn—if Scott had no more business to transact. Such was the strength of the opposition which Gould had overlooked.

When in early February it became clear that Gould, through the use of the proxy market, had secured enough votes to elect a new board, Cass took the case to Harrisburg. He and probably Scott, also, pointed out that the capture of the Fort Wayne by the Erie group would divert business from Pennsylvania to New York. These and other arguments were persuasive, and in thirty-four minutes a bill designed to prevent Gould's control of the Fort Wayne passed both the House and Senate, and was signed by the Governor. The bill provided for four classes of directors of the Fort Wayne, and for the election of only one-fourth of the board each year.

Gould was thus again defeated, though he was, as one observer expressed it, "outwitted, but not subdued." Early in April he renewed an arrangement with the Michigan Southern—the road from Toledo to Chicago—designed to give the Erie access to Chicago. This was a renewal of the threat to the integrity of Vanderbilt's Chicago-Buffalo south shore route. Vanderbilt recognized the threat and tried to gain control of the Michigan Southern. A large interest in the road was held by LeGrand Lockwood, treasurer of the company, and a Gould ally. By the summer the shore lines were merged into a new company—the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern, and Gould and Lockwood had entered into an understanding looking forward to a union of the Lake Shore with the Wabash in which Gould had a large interest.

It was the gold panic of September which defeated this combination. The gold speculation, which has generally been interpreted as a Gould success, was in fact a calamity to Gould. One of its immediate effects was a stock-market shake-out which forced Lockwood, one of the leading Lake Shore stockholders, to sell his stock. It was Vanderbilt, the businessman with funds, and not Gould, the speculator without funds, who bought the distressed stock. Through this speculative windfall, Vanderbilt acquired control of the Lake Shore.

Gould had thus lost his battle for western outlets. The northern route had been captured by Vanderbilt, and the southern by the Pennsylvania. Though Gould had failed to acquire the third route, the Fort Wayne, he continued negotiations with Cass to use the road for a Chicago outlet for the Erie. So long as the Fort Wayne remained independent, there was hope that it might be induced to do business with the Erie, at least on equal terms with the Pennsylvania.

The Pennsylvania, as the months rolled by in 1869, discovered that the southern route via Columbus, despite newspaper and trade reports to the contrary, did not meet its needs. Aware as it was of the competition which an eastward extension of the Fort Wayne would create, it entered into negotiations for control of that road. The bargaining was hard and the terms stiff, but the Pennsylvania, having learned the disadvantages of excessive prudence, made up its mind to acquire the property. On the Fort Wayne stock which the Pennsylvania could have secured at nominal prices seven or eight years before, it was now obliged to guarantee dividends of 12 per cent. While the Pennsylvania agreed to pay only 7 per cent, the Fort Wayne paid a stock dividend in an amount sufficient to make the guarantee equal to 12 per cent upon the amount outstanding before the payment of the stock dividend.

The exhibition of childlike faith in the written pledged word of connecting properties was a policy which the Pennsylvania now abandoned. Gould and Vanderbilt were setting the tone for railroad policy. Local properties, prudently built, carefully financed, and slowly expanded within the limits of gradual increase in earnings, had been parts of a sound corporate policy. This policy was now abandoned. The risks of rapid, even promiscuous expansion were great, but the risks of slow, "sound," and "careful" expansion, as legitimate and useful as this policy might be in theory or in hindsight perspective, was one which no well-balanced trunk line could afford to follow. The Pennsylvania management, in reversing its policy, became one of the wonders of the railroad world. It expanded in all directions, almost regardless of cost. By lease contracts it acquired an outlet to New York City and many essential connections on the west, including not only the Fort Wayne, but the Cleveland & Pittsburgh as well. It built new lines, especially one in western Michigan known as the Grand Rapids & Indiana. It acquired substantial holdings in the old South, and it seemed for a time that it was about to become the leading trunk line in that region. Many of the controlled lines were unprofitable and did not earn their keep for years. Thus Gould, with hardly more than fifteen months of trunk-line railroad experience, had forced this revolutionary change of policy on two of the dominant railroads of the nation.

He accomplished little, however, for the Erie. His inability to capture control of any of the western connections made the lease of the Atlantic unprofitable. Early in April, 1869, therefore, he proceeded, without consulting McHenry, to change the terms of the lease. The lease had guaranteed the payment of interest on the Atlantic's bonds. The Erie proposed to change the coupons on some of the latter's bonds for the first-mortgage bonds of the Boston. The bondholders rejected the offer and the company was returned to receivership. Two receivers were appointed and, strange to say, one of them was—Gould.

Gould as receiver could operate the Atlantic for the benefit of the Erie and pay no rent. Gould recognized that this was temporary, and that soon the Atlantic's bondholders would insist upon the cancellation of the lease. Early in June, 1869, an association of the company's stockholders let it be definitely known that the Erie "must either fulfil the conditions of the lease or give up possession of the Atlantic line," Gould did neither. In fact he had a bill introduced into the New York Legislature to authorize consolidation of the Erie and the Atlantic. By the end of July he and McHenry had made an agreement by which the Atlantic's property would be sold under foreclosure to a new company, and thereafter leased to the Erie. The bondholders of the Atlantic refused to support McHenry. More court battles ensued, and after a stirring battle between Gould and the Atlantic's security holders, the road was finally released to the Erie on condition that it work the line at cost until the foreclosure and sale of the lessor's property.

The Atlantic was therefore held in the interest of the Erie as a pawn in the expansion game of Gould. In this game, Gould and the Erie had been effectively checked and by 1870 the road had lost its struggle for westward connections. It was now strategically weaker than ever. Extending only to the Lake Erie ports, it was flanked on the north by the Vanderbilt lines and on the south by the Pennsylvania's. The Atlantic, the Erie's single western outlet, was in receivership; and its lease of that road was contingent upon its remaining in receivership. After reorganization the Atlantic would become an independent property, open upon equal terms to all of its connections. Despite the individual brilliance of his moves, Gould had failed. He had also lost to Vanderbilt. In this case his fondness for grand speculation had cost him the loss of the rich traffic prize in the form of the Lake Shore route.

In both cases he failed because, like conquering generals from time immemorial, he had started a battle with limited resources. Many aspiring conquerors have lost campaigns because of limited manpower and tools to finish their task. Gould had lost his campaign because of the limited funds of the Erie. The wonder is not that he lost the struggle for connections, but that, despite his limited resources, he even conceived the idea that he could possibly win. Though he lost the battle for the Erie, his influence on the railroad development of the country was permanent and far-reaching.

---

## Notes for Chapter IV

1. Annual report, Pennsylvania, 1863, 15.
2. Fort Wayne, report of superintendent, 1863, cited in Am. R. R. Journal, April 30, 1864, 437.
3. Known hereafter as the Indiana Central.
4. For details on the Columbus, Chicago & Indiana Central, see Logansport Pharos, cited in Am. R. R. Journal, Feb. 8, 1868, 145-6; and Am. R. R. Journal, April 25, 1868, 390-1.
5. Known hereafter as the Peoria.
6. Annual report, Toledo, Peoria & Warsaw, 1867, cited in Am. R. R. Journal, May 16, 1868, 462-3.
7. Ibid., Sept. 5, 1868, 847; Phila. North American, May 21, 1869, and July 8, 1869.
8. R. R. Record, Dec. 17, 1868, 505.
9. United States R. R. & Mining Register, March 27, 1869.
10. Ibid., March 13, 1869.
11. This statement was made in a message from New York to London after the lease of the road. See Herapath's Ry. Journal, Dec. 12, 1868, 1266.
12. Letter of James McHenry to the London Times, Feb. 15, 1869, cited in United States R. R. & Mining Register, March 13, 1869.
13. New York Tribune, Feb. 25, 1869. For details on the lease contract, see Anglo-American Times, London, cited in United States R. R. & Mining Register, Feb. 6, 1869; Am. R. R. Journal, Feb. 6, 1869, 149; and The Road, Feb. 15, 1875, 18.
14. Annual report, Pennsylvania, 1869, 17.
15. New York Tribune, April 5, 1875.
16. Ibid., Jan. 14, 1869.
17. United States R. R. & Mining Register, Jan. 16, 1869.
18. Ibid.
19. State of New York, Testimony before Select Committee appointed by Assembly to investigate Alleged Mismanagement of Erie Railway, 1873, 352-6.
20. State of New York, Assembly, 1869. Investigation of Increase of Stock of Railroad Companies, 57, Gould.
21. Known hereafter as the Wabash.
22. Annual report, Fort Wayne, 1868, cited in Am. R. R. Journal, April 3, 1869, 372.
23. New York Tribune, Feb. 28, 1869.
24. Ibid., Jan. 16, 1869.
25. United States R. R. & Mining Register, Feb. 13, 1869.
26. Phila. North American, Feb. 3, 1869.
27. This story was referred to by Chairman Tillman of a Congressional Committee investigating a strike on the Philadelphia & Reading. See Phila. Press, Feb. 18, 1888.
28. Anglo-American Times, cited in United States R. R. & Mining Register, Feb. 6, 1869; March 20, 1869; New York Tribune, Feb. 25, 1869; Phila. North American, Feb. 4, 1869.
29. New York Tribune, Feb. 25, 1869.
30. Known hereafter as the Lake Shore.
31. New York Tribune, Aug. 21, 1869; Oct. 14, 1869; Oct. 28, 1869; Am. R. R. Journal, Aug. 28, 1869, 979.
32. Chron., April 10, 1869, 468.
33. London Daily News, cited in Phila. North American, June 16, 1869.
34. Erie, Minutes of Executive Committee, July 31, 1869.