# Chapter V - Gould Manages the Erie

Important as the problems of expansion were, it was still necessary to manage the day-to-day operations of the Erie. To accomplish this task satisfactorily, even though Gould and his associates had few Erie shares, a close control of the road's management was indispensable. The policies that Gould adopted to make this possible aroused storms of criticism and condemnation. A representative of the English Erie shareholders, for example, in referring to some Gould move in the courts, observed that this action appeared to him "to be an outrage on private rights perpetrated in the name of the law, such as has no parallel in modern times in any civilized country in the world."[^006_1] This statement, although written in the heat of a stirring controversy, had some substance of truth. Control was so ingeniously arranged and so comprehensively executed, that Gould could and did ignore the views, to say nothing of the rights, of the stockholders, and resisted for almost his entire administration the efforts of city, state and federal courts to unseat him. In October of 1868 he surrounded himself on the Erie directorate with two leading Tammany politicians, Tweed and Sweeny, and secured an influence in the state courts by granting Judge Barnard a free gift of a liberal amount of Erie stock. He also required every member of the board either to sign a pledge to support his policies or to resign.[^006_2] To prevent interference, he arranged with his Tammany associates to pass a bill so that at each shareholders' annual meeting only one-fifth of the board would be elected. This classification, Gould informed the Erie shareholders in all seriousness, probably would "secure to the property a responsible, experienced and intelligent management, and be the means of preventing in the future the sudden changes in the policy of this magnificent railway, peculiar to it in the past while it was a mere creature of Wall Street speculation."[^006_3]

Thus protected, Gould did not find it necessary to hold any board meetings. In May, 1869, the English stockholders who had bought so much of the stock at high prices organized with the hope of transferring the stock to their names, thereby securing representation on the board. Gould was concerned over this assertion of independence. At the 1869 annual meeting, therefore, new members were elected who more than ever made the board a Gould rubber stamp. One member was an assistant treasurer of the Erie, another the father of the transfer clerk and himself an Erie employee, another the secretary of the company, another its supply agent, and still another an employee of the Fisk-controlled Narragansett Steamship Company.[^006_4]

Here was an almost unassailable combination. Gould controlled the board, and even if he owned none of the stock, his hand-picked board could not be supplanted for five years. Though the stockholders owned the stock, Gould had the votes. In 1869 the stockholders began a long struggle to compel Gould to allow them to vote. Unfortunately they labored under a heavy handicap. Gould owned a judge, and the early battles were therefore decided in Gould's favor. Tammany Hall, furthermore, controlled the law-making bodies and its leaders served on the Erie board. Gould, however, was not satisfied that the Tammany influence was sufficient to block adverse legislation. To make certain that hostile laws would not be passed, he engaged legislative agents and spent a "good deal" of money in electing "friendly" men. Money so spent, said Gould, was well "invested."[^006_5]

Even with the development of corporate law and practice over the following eighty years it would be difficult to conceive of a more workable combination to perpetuate the control of a corporation with thousands of shareholders, in the hands of a small group, in the face of opposition of the bulk of the shareholders. Modern corporations, it is true, hold their control by the right of proxy freely granted to the officials on the basis of confidence in their management. In this case, however, neither the approval of the stockholders nor the grant of their proxies was essential. The English shareholders soon learned that any stocks which they delivered for transfer could and would be seized by the controlling clique.

The property which Gould took over in the fall of 1868 did not in the three and a half years of his incumbency, upon any proper basis of accounting, earn its interest charges. In charge of this financial derelict, he was able nevertheless in the opening weeks of 1869 to make his drive to capture the western connections. By February the Pennsylvania had stopped him, and by May it had captured control of the lines operating west from Pittsburgh. The south shore route from Buffalo to Chicago was, however, still open.

In order to use that route for the benefit of the Erie, Gould conceived the idea of acquiring a controlling interest in the Wabash and of sending its business over the Lake Shore. The traffic of the former was a grand prize. It could be sent east via Toledo over the Lake Shore or over other connections. Gould planned to unite the two roads, and thus organize a through route between New York, Chicago, and the Mississippi River. Such a combination would block the Vanderbilt-Chicago-New York City route via the Lake Shore and make the Erie a strong competitor for western business.

The initial movement made by Gould to carry out this proposal was in the stock market. By August, 1869, he had bought almost 12,000 shares, and the Lake Shore 15,000, making a total of about 27,000 out of 75,000 outstanding. It is probable, furthermore, that some large stockholders of the Lake Shore also bought heavily into the Wabash.[^006_6]

By the summer of 1869, with the business and earnings of the Wabash rising, Gould's plan of consolidation was about to be consummated. By early August, when he was elected to the Wabash board, the consolidation of the two roads was accepted in railroad circles as a fact.[^006_7] Concurrently with this decision, an agreement was reached with the Erie to lay an extra rail on its line between Buffalo and New York City in order to facilitate the interchange of business between its broad-gauge line and the Lake Shore's narrow-gauge line. It was also proposed that the Erie issue bonds to finance the construction of a third rail.[^006_8]

Gould had thus momentarily achieved the realization of his project for a through western connection of the Erie. The agreements had been made between the boards of directors and some of the leading stockholders, and could be made final only after approval of the stockholders.

In carrying out this project Gould was obliged to carry a heavy financial load. Though he had pledged at least 11,900 shares of Wabash as margin for a bank loan,[^006_9] he did not hesitate to assume additional responsibilities. Presumably to strengthen the position of the Lake Shore-Wabash project in Pittsburgh, he bought 64,000 Cleveland & Pittsburgh shares, which he deposited with a bank as collateral for another loan. It is not clear whether the stock was bought and the loan made by Gould personally or by the Erie.[^006_10]

To increase the price of Wabash stock, Gould took steps to increase its eastbound wheat traffic. This move in turn led him to the wheat export market. If the wheat were used domestically probably little would flow eastbound over the Lake Shore, but if it could be exported, both the Lake Shore and the Erie would receive a long haul. To stimulate exports, Gould was led to think in terms of speculation on a scale of grandeur rarely equaled in American financial history. Foreign merchants paid for American wheat in gold. If the value of the American dollar in terms of gold could be weakened, foreigners would buy more American wheat. No railroad, no individual and no government had control over the price of gold; its price was determined in the open market.

Gould nevertheless conceived the idea that he could raise the price of gold. The country had suspended specie payments and currency was not freely exchangeable for gold. There was a price for gold just as there was a price for any other commodity. In transactions within the country, national currency known as greenbacks were used in settlement of contracts. The national law, however, did not operate abroad, and since foreign trade was therefore conducted in terms of gold, foreign merchants were necessarily interested in the price of gold. To facilitate their operations, a gold market had been established.

Even though international operations were conducted in gold, the American producer exporting cotton, corn or wheat, for example, required payment in domestic currency. The merchant serving as middleman between the American seller and the foreign buyer sold his merchandise for gold. Normally two weeks elapsed between the sale of the goods by the American producer to the American merchant and the receipt of gold by the merchant from the foreign importer. In this period, needed to assemble the goods at the port of export, to complete the bill of lading and to arrange the necessary letters of credit, a drop in the price of gold might cause losses to the American merchants. Prudent merchants, to protect their margin of profit, borrowed gold and sold it on the open market.

To facilitate these operations a reasonable market supply of gold was required. Since interest on government bonds and customs dues was payable in gold a large amount of gold was held in the federal treasury. If a substantial part of the gold outside of the treasury could be controlled by one group and lent to the merchant short sellers, that group could victimize the business community by bidding up gold in the face of frantic buying by businessmen who had sold gold short. To accomplish this successfully, however, the supply of gold controlled by the Treasury must during the period of operations be kept out of the open market.

On the basis of economic and financial conditions, such an operation in the summer and fall of 1869 had little promise of success. The trend of gold was downward. In the summer of 1869 gold was selling at about 135 and many people familiar with existing conditions believed that the price would drop to 120. Prior to 1869 exports of merchandise had been declining. In the spring of 1869, due to large exports from the good American crop, the trend began to turn, and the outward movement of gold dropped sharply. "Everybody," wrote an observer in a leading financial monthly[^006_11] in the summer of 1869, "believed in lower gold prices," while a financial weekly declared that because of the better credit standing of the government, the gold premium would "permanently range at a lower level."[^006_12] Trade and psychological factors combined to produce a feeling of confidence in the value of the currency. Merchants sold gold freely and speculators added their contribution.

Gould, however, was thinking things over. He believed it was possible to create a scarcity of gold, just as a year earlier he had produced a scarcity of legal tender. Though he had ample banking credit in Wall Street, he decided to assure himself an even better line. He therefore bought some stock of the Tenth National Bank. Logically speaking, a bank is a curious mechanism: What a person can not do, a bank can do. A bank in 1869, for example, could multiply a dollar of its assets by four or five. Gould more than understood the possibilities; he decided in fact to surpass them. He would either draw checks against nonexistent assets which the bank for a while would courteously tolerate as an "overdrawn" account, or he could ask the bank to "certify" checks against assets which he would deposit later. How much "later" was not clearly specified, but perhaps enough later to enable him to complete his transactions and to harvest his profit. And in an emergency there was no reason why he could not use the Erie credit for his own personal purposes.

He could not, on the other hand, fight off the government of the United States, and it was therefore essential that the Treasury's gold be kept off the market. In early summer, 1869, Gould quietly began his gold-buying campaign. He bought steadily, though owing to the large supply the price did not rise. The Secretary of the Treasury was buying government bonds and selling gold. During the spring he sold $1,000,000 gold weekly, and in July $3,000,000.[^006_13] The price of gold fell to 138, and in late August to 131. With this weakness in the gold market came weakness in wheat, and wheat prices declined 25 per cent. Traders refused to buy and grain receipts at ports dropped sharply.

In order to increase the traffic strength of the Erie at its eastern end, Gould now decided to acquire control of a newly completed road—the Albany & Susquehanna—which furnished access to the anthracite market of eastern New York and southern New England. Shortly before the road was completed in January, 1869, the stock was selling at about twenty-five cents a share. A large block was then owned by Joseph Ramsey, president of the road. The Erie had no stock ownership in the company. In an effort to gain control, the Erie managers quietly bought a large amount of stock held by cities along the line. Then followed a number of bold maneuvers in the courts, with a view of placing the road in receivership and seizing control through the instrumentality of a complaisant judge. The scheme was admirably conceived and its execution was carried out under dramatic circumstances.[^006_14] The opposition, however, proved to be unusually stubborn. Ramsey, raised in the school of hard railroad experience, met force with force. In August the road was in receivership, and the battle for control between Gould and Ramsey was still on.

Early September found Gould in the midst of a combined stock market-gold-railroad-control campaign of spectacular proportions. If he could force the merchants and traders who were short of gold to cover; if he could advance the price of gold to about 150 and keep it there for a number of weeks, his grand speculation had some chance of succeeding. The volume of export wheat over the new through route would increase. The Lake Shore stockholders who owed no allegiance either to him or Vanderbilt would follow Gould's lead and approve the consolidation with the Wabash. The Erie's traffic would be increased and its strategic position strengthened. The road would control a line from the grain fields of Illinois and Indiana and from the city of Chicago to New York City and to the large markets of eastern and central New York and of southern New England.

To achieve all this it was necessary that the price of gold be advanced. If the price should fall Gould would lose in his gold speculations and, what was probably even more important, in the stock market. Since his stocks had been bought on margin, a price decline would eliminate his margin and lead to their loss. To save himself, it might even be necessary to sell his Wabash and his Albany & Susquehanna holdings. Such an eventuality would probably defeat the proposed Wabash-Lake Shore consolidation.

In late August and early September, however, the price of gold did not move up. In order to advance the price it was necessary, first, to buy more gold. Gould's resources being insufficient, he took Fisk into his confidence and Fisk became a partner. Beyond all, however, it was essential before he or Fisk bought more gold that the Treasury should not sell. In order to assure himself of the government's view on this subject, he decided to make approaches to the President of the United States, and to this end he struck up a friendship with a relative of the President, Abel R. Corbin, a brother of Mrs. Grant.

Gould urged upon the President the desirability of raising farm prices, then as always a popular policy. After some hesitation, the President seemed to agree: at least, so thought Gould. He believed the way had been cleared—that the Treasury would not throw its gold on the market, and early in September he and Fisk sharply stepped up their scale of gold buying until they had acquired enough to control the market. They lent so much gold to merchants and other short sellers that the short interest in gold grew to "enormous" proportions.[^006_15] Merchants and speculators were certain that the weakness of the summer months would continue, and they kept on selling. Gould stated that on the day of the panic the gold short interest exceeded $200,000,000; yet in New York City the gold and gold certificates did not exceed $20,000,000.[^006_16] The sharp rise in the price of gold in September aroused the President. Complaints from legitimate export and import merchants came in volume. Various activities by Gould's confederates, furthermore, made the President suspicious, and becoming aware that Mrs. Grant's brother was involved in gold speculation, he requested that she write to her brother to desist from any participation in the gold market. Corbin, an unsteady old man, showed this letter to Gould on Wednesday night, September 22. Corbin was hot and excited, Gould calm and steady.

Before the market opened on Thursday, Gould, saying nothing about this letter, informed Fisk that the time had now arrived to advance the price of gold sharply and to force the short sellers to settle. He instructed Fisk to buy gold in volume. From a mass of conflicting evidence, it appears that Gould induced Fisk to fabricate some document which indicated that Fisk was buying gold on behalf of another broker. Be that as it may, Gould maintained on Thursday and early Friday an appearance of buying gold; actually he was selling. Under the impetus of heavy buying by Fisk on Friday morning, gold moved from 141 Vs to 144. Thereafter in a matter of minutes the value of gold rose by millions of dollars, and by noon sold at 160. Shortly thereafter a bid appeared at 162Vi. Within a few minutes the wires carried the news of the sale of Treasury gold. With scarcely any transactions on the way down, gold dropped sharply to 140 and then to 133. The stock market, in which Gould was heavily committed, also cracked. During the month of September the price of the Erie, of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, and of the Wabash declined sharply. Gould as a stock trader had heavy losses. Since he had bought on margin, his account was undermargined and he could not pay his brokers' loans. His brokers could have sold his stocks, applied the proceeds to his loans and then sued for the unpaid balance. Gould was not to be so easily caught. He still had control of the Erie and he shifted some of the Erie stocks from his personal account to that of the Erie,[^006_17] and with the help of his controlled judge, enjoined his creditors from selling the pledged securities. This saved him from his stock-market creditors but did not protect him from his gold-market creditors. A large part of the losses fell upon Fisk who had bought much of the gold at high prices as agent for several brokerage firms including Smith, Gould, Martin & Company. To protect itself the latter firm repudiated Fisk's transactions.

Despite this repudiation every dealer, including Gould and his brokerage firm, had to make a settlement with the Gold Board through the Gold Exchange Bank by submitting daily a statement of debits and credits. Every dealer except Smith, Gould, Martin & Company submitted a statement. Feeling against the firm was "intensely bitter."[^006_18] Gould remained calm and defied the board, the bank, and his fellow dealers. The latter had their rights, Gould had his judge—Judge Cardoza—a newcomer to the Gould-Tweed financial and political set-up. Cardoza issued an injunction against the Gold Exchange, restraining it from buying or selling gold for the account of Smith, Gould, Martin & Company. A collection of other injunctions was secured and Gould was saved from his gold-market creditors.

Gould's speculations had, however, failed, and this failure led to the collapse of the railroad route between the seaboard and the Mississippi. When Gould promoted the Lake Shore-Wabash consolidation in the summer of 1869, Vanderbilt recognized that he himself had only a minority interest in the Lake Shore. He soon perceived the weak points of the opposition. Discovering that LeGrand Lockwood (a brokerage associate of Gould in the Wabash-Lake Shore speculation) personally, as well as the brokerage firm of Lockwood & Company, had bought Lake Shore stock on borrowed funds, he took the offensive and, in the extravagant language of a contemporary commentator, "with all his vast resources in hand, batteries unlimbered, and military chest full to the brim,"[^006_19] moved to acquire the Lake Shore.

Late in August, after the announcement of the Lake Shore-Erie contract, he opened his attack on the Lake Shore. The stock was then selling at no. Vanderbilt threw large blocks on the market, and the price sagged to the middle 80s. Sales of New York Central and of Harlem produced sympathetic selling in other stocks. In the middle of the panic break, Lockwood sold 25,000 shares of Lake Shore for $2,000,000 but was unable to deliver the stock. The lending banks refused to hand over the stock in exchange for checks, and insisted upon legal tender.[^006_20] In this emergency, Lockwood, according to some reports, asked Gould for help,[^006_21] but Gould, because of his financial troubles, had to exercise all his ingenuity to remain solvent. The Lockwood firm failed with heavy liabilities. It owed the Lake Shore more than $1,000,000,[^006_22] and, according to one report, a number of Ohio capitalists had deposits with the firm of about $500,000 each.[^006_23]

The failure of Lockwood was an opportunity for Vanderbilt. He borrowed $10,000,000 from Baring Bros., and with part of the loan purchased 70,000 shares of the Lake Shore from Lockwood.[^006_24]

Even with this acquisition, it was doubtful whether Vanderbilt could defeat the Wabash consolidation. Some of the large shareholders of the Lake Shore were convinced of the wisdom of the Wabash-Lake Shore union. The Lake Shore, furthermore, had contracts with Lockwood & Company for the purchase of Wabash stock. Early in October the Lake Shore board met behind closed doors, and appointed two Vanderbilt men to positions of influence. Despite this, the board approved the proposed Wabash consolidation, and submitted the plan to the stockholders at a special meeting to be held on December 29. The stockholders rejected the proposal. Gould and the Erie had lost again, and Vanderbilt and the New York Central were victorious.

Shortly before that failure Gould also lost control of the Albany & Susquehanna. Ramsey had enlisted the services of J. Pierpont Morgan, then a local banker, who was soon to make his mark in national affairs. With Morgan's help a court decision was handed down which ousted the Gould board and legalized the Ramsey-Morgan board.[^006_25] Under Morgan leadership, the road was leased to the Delaware & Hudson at a guaranteed rental of 7 per cent upon its stock. The price of the lessor's line shot up to 125. Gould probably did not profit, as he had sold his stock in the panic.

The Erie now had no outlets east of New York or west of Buffalo. In the battle for connections, it was its competitors who had won, and the Erie was permanently weakened. Gould's personal losses were heavy. In the stock-market movements of the next two years he did little except to organize small speculative market pools. His impaired financial condition was further revealed by the unimportant role he assumed in the acquisition of control of a road which, although having no relation to the Erie, did connect with the Wabash. The Hannibal & St. Joseph[^006_26] controlled a short line from the Mississippi River gateways of Quincy and Hannibal to St. Joseph and Kansas City, and in the late sixties had no rival in a territory more than a hundred miles wide between the Mississippi and the Missouri Rivers. Between 1865 and 1871, the stock sold at prices warranted neither by its earnings nor its assets. The high price invited substantial selling from large stockholders of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy,[^006_27] who were also large and in most cases original stockholders of the road.[^006_28]

This was the stock which the Tammany ring, led by Tweed and Sweeny, guided largely by Smith, the brokerage partner of Gould, bought heavily in the prosperous summer of 1871. It is significant that officers of the Burlington were informed that the Hannibal stock-buying clique included Tweed, Sweeny and others, with no mention of Gould.[^006_29] When the Hannibal was finally acquired by the Tammany group in 1871, Smith, not Gould, was appointed president, and although Gould was elected to the board of directors he owned only a nominal number of shares.

While Gould engaged in these successful battles to acquire connections, he did not overlook the detailed problems of managing the Erie as a railroad property. Here again Gould revealed his inability to disassociate corporate and personal interests. A managerial policy, sound in itself, was impaired and occasionally destroyed by its prostitution to considerations of personal profit. He would propose a sound move in the interests of the Erie, but in executing it he could not overlook the exploitation of an opportunity for personal gain.

Even before the stockholders had elected him to the presidency in October, 1868, such an opportunity emerged. The executive committee had authorized him as president to terminate a contract with the United States Express Company and to make a more favorable one.[^006_30] Accordingly Gould and his associate Fisk informed the express company that its annual rent to the Erie would be increased by $500,000. When the express company refused, it was told to leave the Erie. Gould informed the company that the Erie would organize a new express company, and the stock of the United States Express Company dropped from 60 to 16. At the lower price Gould bought the stock,[^006_31] signed a new contract and sold the stock on the advance. The profits from this market transaction were reported to be approximately $3,000,000. Gould in reporting this transaction to Erie stockholders did not misrepresent the fact. He wrote that the Erie had made a new contract with the United States Express largely increasing the Erie's compensation. While the fact was correct, the truth was not. It was a half-truth, which is often more dangerous than a falsehood.

More important to the Erie than the express business was the rail traffic. After disruption of friendly relations with the Atlantic in the fall of 1865, the Erie made repeated efforts to strengthen its traffic position in the Pennsylvania oil region. In 1867 numerous proposals for the acquisition of various railroads in that territory for the increase in oil traffic were considered by the board and the executive committee.[^006_32] Though the oil business was increasing, the rates, largely because of McHenry's rate-cutting policy in the Atlantic, were declining, Shortly after Gould became president, the Atlantic's receiver laid a proposal before the Erie for the acquistion of a controlling interest in some pipe lines in the oil regions. The executive committee, significantly enough, referred to the proposal to the president.[^006_33] The Erie did nothing but its president, Gould, acting through his personal account, did much. Together with others, he bought more than half the stock of the most important pipe-line company in the region—the Allegheny Transportation Company.[^006_34]

Meanwhile the war initiated by McHenry had spread, and rate-cuts, drawbacks and rebates soon characterized the oil business.[^006_35] All participating lines made efforts to stop the war, and by September, 1868, the Pennsylvania, the New York Central, and the Atlantic finally banded together and reached an agreement. "To avoid needless and harmful depreciation" in rates on oil, the contract of September 24, 1868, provided for pooling of the oil traffic, prohibition of drawbacks, and the equalization of rates, the intention of the parties being that all shippers should "be placed upon a perfect equality."[^006_36]

The contract had only one signature—that of Scott of the Pennsylvania, and thereby hangs a tale. Gould, owing to his control of the pipe lines through his holdings in the Allegheny Transportation, was obviously unprepared to sign a non-discrimination contract. Shortly after the date of the agreement a letter from McHenry to the Atlantic's president emphasizing the former's rate-reduction philosophy appeared in the public press. A rate of one cent per ton mile (the current rate then was about three cents), he observed, would greatly increase railroad profits.[^006_37]

By the time this letter appeared, Gould had secured full control of the Erie's destinies, and was ready to co-operate with McHenry. The drastic rate war of October, 1868, followed. Less than two months later the Erie's lease to the Atlantic gave Gould power to exploit the Atlantic's oil traffic. Gould put the oil business of the combined Erie and Atlantic into the hands of Henry Harley—a man long experienced in this field. Rebates and drawbacks were freely used for competitive purposes. In this rivalry the Erie was not successful. Early in 1872 just before the negotiation of the South Improvement Company's contracts, the Erie's oil business had dwindled to nominal proportions.

The delivery of the oil traffic on the eastern end of the Erie posed still other problems. Additional facilities at these termini were essential to handle the business. The Long Dock terminal being inadequate, the Erie purchased from Gould the property of the Weehawken Docks Company. This was a simple contract, but, because of Gould's inside position, the Erie was obliged to pay "an extra price."[^006_38] On the plea that additional building space was necessary to take care of the larger flow of business, the Erie leased the Grand Opera House from Gould at a rental beyond any true rental value. Since the $300,000 cash needed to purchase the property was "borrowed" from the Erie as a prepayment of the Erie rental, the Opera House had cost Gould little.[^006_39]

The situation at Buffalo meanwhile confronted the Erie with a critical problem. The capture of the Lake Shore by Vanderbilt was followed by the closing of the south shore route. To open an alternative route, Gould revived plans for construction of a parallel road between Buffalo and Suspension Bridge. Early in 1867, prior to the Gould regime, the Erie management had already agreed upon the building of such a connection with the Great Western.[^006_40] The road was now completed and the new company which built and owned the line leased it to the Erie. Even before it was finished, Gould entered into negotiations for a through line via the north shore to Detroit.[^006_41] The stock of the new company was issued as a bonus, and part of it in some inscrutable way fell into the hands of Gould and Fisk.[^006_42]

Since it was clear that Vanderbilt would not permit the Lake Shore to deliver any business to the Erie, sound judgment dictated the wisdom of co-operation and the avoidance of slashing price wars. Rates on the Erie were low. What the Erie needed, observed a leading railroad journal, was "not so much more business, as business that [paid]."[^006_43]

This, however, was precisely what Gould was unable to give the Erie. Early in 1870 the road was offering large drawbacks on westbound traffic. In February, Gould, W. H. Vanderbilt (son of Cornelius, and vice president of the New York Central), and Thomson, for the Erie, New York Central, and Pennsylvania respectively, in a move to stabilize rates, agreed that no contract would be recognized by trunk lines except at rates in the printed schedule, and that any officer who quoted rates below such schedule would be dismissed from the service.[^006_44] This agreement like so many others, proved to be temporary. Early in June a fierce rate war began and within a few weeks livestock from Buffalo to New York City was reduced from $120 to $40 a car. A few days later the reduction of rates by the Erie to $1.00 a car was followed by the fantastic spectacle of the movement of sheep and hogs from Buffalo to Suspension Bridge at one cent apiece.[^006_45] All roads connecting with New York City were soon drawn into this struggle.

The war was too fierce to last and by late August the contestants were ready to settle, Gould taking the lead. A conclusive settlement was reached in late December. A circular signed by Gould, Scott, and W. H. Vanderbilt prohibited the offering of rebates to shippers. All parties were enjoined to carry out the agreement in good faith, so that all shippers could be placed "on a perfect equality."[^006_46] This agreement also lasted only a short time. By December, 1871, the Erie and the Lake Shore were carrying cattle from Chicago to New York at $80 per car, one-half the usual rate, and were paying drawbacks on grain.[^006_47] Powerful competitive factors in the major industries—iron, oil, wheat, livestock, lumber, coal—produced continuous rate disturbances.

Although neither Gould nor Vanderbilt was able to control the rate structure, both had full power to improve the physical property, raise the standard of maintenance and increase the operating efficiency of their respective properties. Vanderbilt accomplished these results on every property he acquired—the Harlem, the Hudson River, the New York Central, and the Lake Shore. On these lines he performed outstanding services in reducing unit costs and raising standards. The Erie's physical property in the years following the death of Marsh at the height of the Civil War inflation, had deteriorated, the speculative conflicts of the Erie managers leaving them little time for cultivation of the art of railroad operation. Of equal importance was the fact that the road was not supplied with sufficient funds to finance the provision of rolling stock and other essentials to improve operating standards.

After Gould succeeded in acquiring control of the Erie, he had also adopted policies designed to improve the road's physical condition and to reduce costs. He made an active study of the efficiency of iron versus steel rails and discovered the superiority of the latter. In view of their high cost, however, he was constrained, to use his own language, "to investigate whether a middle course could not be adopted with advantage and economy."[^006_48] He learned that a mill in Trenton, New Jersey, owned by one of the leading iron manufacturers of the time, Abram S. Hewitt, had been experimenting on the manufacture of iron rails with steel heads. Hewitt was a distinguished citizen, a member of one of the country's leading iron firms, Cooper & Hewitt, becoming later one of the public-spirited men of the day, successively a congressman and the mayor of New York City. The Erie became joint owner with Cooper & Hewitt of the Trenton Mill, which rolled steel-headed rails for the account of the Erie. Hewitt was confident of the success of these rails. In December, 1870, he expressed his optimism in a letter to the Massachusetts Railroad Commissioners, declaring that the Erie, under Gould, had been able through the use of these rails, to reduce the needs of new rails from 2,000 tons to about 600 tons monthly.[^006_49]

Trade and financial journals vied in commending the high operating standards of the Erie management. Even the popular organs joined in their praise. After reviewing Gould's annual report of the Erie in glowing terms which "in comprehensiveness, compactness and clearness . . . [was] almost as much a 'Public Document' as that of the Treasury or General Post Office," an eastern weekly observed that the Erie's managers had made the road "the great aorta of the heart and metropolis of the Western World.[^006_50] In the summer of 1871 a leading eastern railroad journal called attention to the fact that four "elegant" drawing-room coaches were being built for the Erie to operate between New York and Niagara Falls over the new extension from Buffalo, These new coaches, it was declared, were to "surpass any others yet made. . . ."[^006_51]

Gould was thus in the opinion of many of his contemporaries in and out of the railroad field an able operating man. This reputation, however, was not deserved. He was, rather, a skillful publicity writer and an excellent salesman. His ability in relating favorable, and in glossing over unfavorable, facts, his skill in doing a little along the path of righteousness and in enlarging that little into much, were unique. He did indeed build a few iron bridges, and though he made it appear that he would build more, he didn't. He also built a number of elegant passenger coaches which were used for advertising purposes on the Niagara branch. Although he laid only a few steel or steel-headed rails, Hewitt, the able iron and steel manufacturer, lent his willing pen to the glorification of his improvement program.

It must have been surprising to cursory observers that despite all the deeds detailed by Gould, and in spite of the even more extravagant expectations which he raised, the Erie remained an inefficient property. In the spring of 1871 a newspaper reporter observed that the equipment handling milk traffic, one of its most lucrative forms of business, was still old and dilapidated. Some of the cars had been used for fifteen years, the brakes were nearly worn out, and the cars appeared to be "ready to break down at any moment. . . "[^006_52]

At the end of three and a half years of Gould power, the Erie was a physical wreck. It "was an incomplete concern, its track disconnected at different points, largely single track, no terminal improvements or facilities, defective machinery, iron rails, largely wooden bridges, in a condition that it could not be worked with economy: . . ."[^006_53] Such was the language of Hugh Jewett, president and receiver of the road and an experienced railroad operator, who took over the executive responsibilities after the departure of Gould and the McHenry satellites who followed him. Jewett's conclusions were confirmed by another railroad man who, in the interests of his English clients, made an elaborate survey of the property. The Erie, he wrote, needed iron to replace its wooden bridges. It lacked steel rails and durable sleepers, and it badly needed an improvement in its grades. Its terminal arrangements were inadequate. The road, furthermore, had only a single track, while the New York Central had four and the Pennsylvania two tracks, and in many places a third. The New York Central with its additional tracks between New York and Buffalo was able to reduce the running time of trains and the cost of freight transportation. The absence of double tracks on the Erie, on the absence of double tracks on the Erie, on the other hand, led to delays, expense and operating risks. The absence of improvements increased substantially the road's operating expenses.[^006_54] Thus in his first venture as an executive of a major road, Gould as an operating man was a failure.

Despite the issue of a mass of new securities he did little to improve the property, and in fact devoted but little time to the details of railroad operation. Occasionally in later years he expressed pride in his ability to operate a railroad with the help of only a few associates. His forte, however, was not in detailed operation but rather in the shifting of control of properties. Long before this was generally known, groups of security holders were attacking the Gould control. Early in March, 1872, he was ousted; but before he left he negotiated a number of transactions of more than ordinary profit which put him in funds to finance other enterprises. The first involved an Erie lease of two small railroads, which afforded an outlet to another road—the Northern Central—for its business from Pennsylvania to eastern New York and New England. Because of the increase in coal traffic in the intervening years, the leases had become profitable to the Erie. Late in 1871, representing himself as an Erie agent, he bought control of both lines, and then, by defaulting on the rental, forfeited the leases. In view of the strategic position of the roads, he found it easy to sell the stocks to the Northern Central at a profit of more than $2,000,000.[^006_55]

The Northern Central transaction was accompanied by two others, both profitable to Gould. Shortly before a small oil road, the Union & Titusville, was completed, the Erie board authorized its president to enter into an agreement for the operation of the completed line.[^006_56] After the road was finished, the president (Gould), ignoring the authorization of the board, acquired a trifle less than 50 per cent of its stock. When the line was opened in February, 1871, its competitor, the Oil Creek & Allegheny River, closely affiliated with the Pennsylvania, cut rates sharply. Gould had a loss on his hands. The stock had no market. The competitive line, however, was well known in Philadelphia where the stock in the spring of 1871 sold at more than $50 a share. In August the Gould line was leased to the Pennsylvania affiliate, and in December the lease was transformed into a merger. Gould's stock, with a nominal nuisance value, was exchanged for almost 8,000 shares of a stock with a market value of about $50 a share.[^006_57]

At about the same time, another transaction, the lease of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh to the Pennsylvania, was completed. This gave the Pennsylvania its entrance from the east into Cleveland, enabling it from that day to this to bid for a share of the rapidly growing traffic of the Cleveland industrial area. Just how Gould and his associates acquired the block of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh is not known.[^006_58] When in consequence of the lease Gould and his associates were placed on the former's board of directors, they represented not the Erie, but their own personal interests. The combined holdings of the Pennsylvania and the Gould group were not sufficient to assure approval of the lease. To obtain additional votes, about 10 per cent of the company's proxies were bought and the stock transferred to the names of the Gould group,[^006_59] while to make ratification certain, another financial device was adopted, a device which bore all the earmarks of Gould's ingenuity. The notice of the special meeting to be held on November 21 was issued on November 3. The transfer books were closed on October 30, ostensibly only for the 2 per cent regular quarterly dividend. Actually, it turned out that when the announcement was issued on November 3, the transfer books had also been closed on October 30 for the purpose of voting on the proposed lease contract.

The lease was duly ratified. Since the number of shares held by Gould is not known, the extent to which he benefited from the lease cannot be determined. Neither is it known to whom and at what price he sold his Cleveland & Pittsburgh stock. Since he was elected to the Cleveland & Pittsburgh board he must have had some holdings.[^006_60]

From these transactions, completed by the end of 1871, Gould realized substantial profits. He also owned at this time considerable real estate, most of which, however, was heavily mortgaged. The large collection of securities of Erie auxiliaries afforded him some additional income. Neither the real estate nor these securities were sufficiently liquid to permit their use as collateral to finance stock-market operations. In the Erie there were no further profits to be made. The property was in poor condition, its financial position was desperate, and its stocks and bonds were being offered in the markets at lower and lower prices. Moreover, the stockholders who for so long had been deprived of any representation on the board were now engaged in a contest which grew more and more unfavorable to Gould. At the New York State election in the fall of 1871, his political friends were overturned and the new state officials appeared willing to co-operate with anti-Gould factions. His famous judicial associate, Judge Barnard, had been ousted, while a number of groups of shareholders were organizing for the attack. Gould finally succumbed. He resigned—but he did so under conditions which enabled him to escape the legal effect of his breach of trust. He had lost much of his profits gained in 1868 and 1869. He had never regained for the Erie the losses which during his administration he had inflicted upon it. Despite these violations of his corporate trust, however, he succeeded in avoiding any legal responsibility for his defections, and in the end he resigned his control of the road in such a way as largely to enhance his personal fortune.

---

## Notes for Chapter V

[^006_1]: Charles Burt, in *R. R. Gaz.*, Aug. 13, 1870, 469.
[^006_2]: *Heath et al. vs. Erie Railway Co. et al.*, Circuit Court S. D., N. Y., April 27, 1871; in *Federal Cases* Vol. XI, 976, Bill of Complaint.
[^006_3]: *United States R. R. & Mining Register*, Feb. 26, 1870.
[^006_4]: *Heath et al. vs. Erie Railway Co. et al.*, Circuit Court S. D., N. Y., April 27, 1871; in *Federal Cases* Vol. XI, 976, Bill of Complaint.
[^006_5]: *New York Tribune*, April 12, 1873.
[^006_6]: Amasa Stone and H. B. Payne of Cleveland, H. F. Clark, Augustus Schell and J. H. Barker of New York, interested in the Lake Shore in 1869, and elected to the Wabash board in 1870, were the leading factors in the ill-fated expansion of the Wabash in the early seventies. On the basis of this and other evidence it can be inferred that these capitalists owned large blocks of Wabash stock.
[^006_7]: In the Burlington archives, for example, there is a letter from J. N. Denison, treasurer of the Burlington, to J. F. Joy, president, Aug. 23, 1869, in which Denison called attention to the fact that the Wabash had consolidated with the Lake Shore on the basis of a joint capital of $50,000,000 with a debt of $35,000,000, and in a letter to Forbes, Aug. 25, 1869, Denison refers to an article in the *Wall Street Journal* (sic) in which the terms of exchange of the securities of the two roads are described.
[^006_8]: Erie, Minutes, Executive Committee, Sept. 10, 1869.
[^006_9]: Supreme Court, County of Delaware, Joseph H. Ramsey against Jay Gould et al., Complaint 66-67.
[^006_10]: Cass, president of the Fort Wayne, in a letter to S. J. Tilden, March 18, 1872, stated definitely that in 1869, the Erie controlled a majority of the stock of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh. Cass in 1869 was on the board of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, and therefore was in a position to know the facts. This is according to the *New York World*, March 20, 1872. Late in September, 1869, the Erie sued to prevent the Union Bank of New York City from selling stock which had been placed as collateral for a loan by the Erie. Included in this collateral were 64,000 shares of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh, and 11,900 shares of the Wabash. In May and June of the same year in court proceedings initiated by Gould to prevent the Wabash from increasing its outstanding stock, Gould, and not the Erie, appeared as the owner of 10,000 shares of Wabash. Furthermore, in the minutes of the board of directors and of the executive committee of the Erie, no mention is made either of the holdings of Cleveland & Pittsburgh or of the Wabash. If Cass is correct in his statement that the Erie in 1869 did control a majority of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh stock, it may be inferred that Gould, in order to extricate himself from the financial predicament he was in after the Black Friday in September of 1869, transferred both his stock and his loan from himself to the Erie. A financial newspaper stated editorially that the borrower from the Union Bank was a brokerage firm of which Gould was a member, but that Fisk in his affidavit insisted that the Erie was the real owner of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh stock. See *Stockholder*, Oct. 5, 1869, 760-1.
[^006_11]: *Bankers' Magazine*, Nov. 1869, 385.
[^006_12]: *Chron.*, March 27, 1869, 390.
[^006_13]: *New York Tribune*, July 9, 1869; July 21, 1869.
[^006_14]: For details see Charles F. Adams, Jr. and Henry Adams: "An Erie Raid," in *Chapters of Erie, and Other Essays*, 135-2.
[^006_15]: *New York Tribune*, Sept. 27, 1869.
[^006_16]: *Gold Panic Investigation*, Report No. 31, House of Representatives, 41st Congress, 2nd Session, 1870, 134, Gould.
[^006_17]: Supreme Court, County of Delaware, Joseph H. Ramsey against Jay Gould et al., Complaint 66-7.
[^006_18]: *New York Tribune*, Sept. 29, 1869.
[^006_19]: *Stockholder*, Nov. 9, 1869.
[^006_20]: *Ibid.*, Oct. 5, 1869.
[^006_21]: *New York Commercial Advertiser*, Oct. 5, 1869.
[^006_22]: *R. R. Record*, Jan. 20, 1870, 482.
[^006_23]: *New York Commercial Advertiser*, Oct. 4, 1869.
[^006_24]: *New York Tribune*, Oct. 1, 1869.
[^006_25]: *The People vs. Albany & Susquehanna Railroad Company*, I Lansing, 309, Supreme Court, N.Y. State.
[^006_26]: Known hereafter as the Hannibal.
[^006_27]: Known hereafter as the Burlington.
[^006_28]: Burlington archives, Denison to Hall, May 10, 1871.
[^006_29]: *Ibid.*, Denison to John C. Green, Aug. 1, 1871.
[^006_30]: Erie, Minutes, Executive Committee, Aug. 1, 1869.
[^006_31]: See Alvin F. Harlow: *Old Way Bills*, 317, Appleton-Century, New York, 19341 *Chron.*, March 6, 1869, 301; *New York Tribune*, Feb. 25, 1869; March 1, 1869. Many details of the raid on the express stocks are found in *Cincinnati Gazette* of March 8, 1869, cited in *Chicago Tribune*, March 12, 1869.
[^006_32]: Erie, Minutes of Executive Committee, June 26, 1867; Aug. 14, 1867; and Minutes, Board of Directors, Oct. 2, 1867.
[^006_33]: Erie, Minutes of Executive Committee, Aug. 19, 1868.
[^006_34]: J. T. Henry, *History of Petroleum*, 531-2, Jas. B. Rodgers Co., Philadelphia, 1873.
[^006_35]: For rate cuts 1867-69, see State of New York, *Railroad Investigation*, 1879, 2739, Diven.
[^006_36]: This contract is in the files of the Erie, Cleveland, Ohio.
[^006_37]: *New York Herald*, Oct. 7, 1868.
[^006_38]: *Heath et al. vs. Erie Railway Co. et al.*, Circuit Court S. D., N. Y., April 27, 1871; in *Federal Cases* Vol. XI, 976, Bill of Complaint.
[^006_39]: *Ibid.*
[^006_40]: Erie, Minutes, Executive Committee, March 27, 1867.
[^006_41]: Joy papers, Gould to Joy, Sept. 2, 1870.
[^006_42]: State of New York, *Railroad Investigation*, 1879, 2468-9, Guppy.
[^006_43]: *R. R. Gaz.*, Jan. 6, 1872, 422.
[^006_44]: Joy papers, H. E. Sargent to W. H. Vanderbilt, Feb. 21, 1870, telegram from Vanderbilt to Sargent of the same date, and printed circular marked "General Notice, Feb. 21, 1870."
[^006_45]: *R. R. Gaz.*, July 2, 1870.
[^006_46]: *Ibid.*, Dec. 24, 1870, 294.
[^006_47]: Joy papers, J. M. Walker to Joy, Dec. 8, 1871.
[^006_48]: Annual report, Erie, 1869, cited in *Am. R. R. Journal*, Jan. 29, 1870, 119.
[^006_49]: *R. R. Gaz.*, Jan. 28, 1871, 414.
[^006_50]: *Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper*, Feb. 12, 1870.
[^006_51]: *R. R. Gaz.*, June 17, 1871, 140.
[^006_52]: *New York Tribune*, April 18, 1871.
[^006_53]: State of New York, *Railroad Investigation*, 1879, 1371, Jewett.
[^006_54]: For details on the report of this railroad man, Captain H. W. Tyler, see *R. R. Gaz.*, Nov. 21, 1874, 451; *Am. R. R. Journal*, Nov. 28, 1874, 1508; Dec. 5, 1874, 1540.
[^006_55]: State of New York, *Railroad Investigation*, 1879, Vol. V, 534.
[^006_56]: Erie, Minutes, Board of Directors, Aug. 18, 1870.
[^006_57]: *Am. R. R. Journal*, Dec. 30, 1871, 1462; *The Road*, March 1, 1875, 35.
[^006_58]: For details on this point, see *supra*, note 10.
[^006_59]: This percentage represents the estimate of a writer in the *New York Commercial Advertiser*, Nov. 3, 1871.
[^006_60]: For some of the details on the Cleveland & Pittsburgh lease, see *New York Commercial Advertiser*, Nov. 3, 1871 and Nov. 4, 1871.
