# Chapter X - Gould Acquires the Wabash

The second major field of Gould's corporate activity in the three boom years of 1879, 1880, and 1881 was the rich traffic-producing area between the Missouri River from Kansas City to Omaha and the Great Lakes at Chicago, Toledo and Detroit. This region was featured by the hottest kind of railroad competition. Through lines, branches, lines running counter to the main direction of traffic, and roads partly finished abounded. Most of the feeders and branches had passed their dividends, and a substantial majority had defaulted on their interest. Some of these were of no strategic importance; others, although in or bordering on receivership, controlled valuable terminal facilities or short connections between rapidly growing traffic centers. It was therefore difficult for a few groups to acquire control and thereafter maintain a competitive equilibrium. There were too many roads and too many conflicting groups; but it was possible for one person or group to acquire a few strategic lines and use them to disturb the rate structure, to break the pools, and to produce business chaos. This is what Gould accomplished in this region.

Gould's capture of a number of main lines dominating the Kansas City-St. Louis area, and of the strategically located Wabash extending from St. Louis and the upper Mississippi River gateways to the Great Lakes at Toledo was both surprising and spectacular. No one suspected his invasion of this region, and his arrival led to fantastic estimates of future possibilities. Control of the Wabash led him into territory crossed by eastern trunk lines, and their connections enabled him to invade some of the richest traffic areas of the country, as well as to challenge some of the major trunk lines in their own territory. The upper and lower Missouri valleys together with the lower Great Lakes area—all directly invaded—had transportation problems of their own, and it is to these problems that attention must be directed. Only by understanding them can the business significance of Gould's actions be appreciated.

By the middle seventies a notable difference between the development of the middle-western roads north and south of Chicago had emerged. Between Chicago and the Mississippi and Missouri Valley crossings the railroads were financially strong, while in the rich wheat and corn fields in central and southern Illinois, and in Indiana and Missouri, they were generally weak. Of this latter group the Wabash occupied a strategic position.

In the early seventies the road reached four gateways on the Mississippi River: St. Louis, Hannibal, Quincy, and Keokuk. Its freight traffic was described in one authoritative trade source as "enormous." Its line was the shortest route from Toledo to points in Missouri and Kansas, and from Buffalo to St. Louis the line was one hundred miles shorter than the route via Chicago. "Only Central Route to the West" was the challenging description the Wabash used in its advertising program.[^1] In addition to these main lines of traffic, it controlled also five considerable branches which were "accessible by a very large proportion of Central Illinois."[^2]

The Wabash was the only road of those operating east from St. Louis which reached the upper gateways of the Mississippi and also Toledo. In addition it was the only St. Louis road connecting with the Great Lakes east of Chicago. The improving technology of steam railroad operation had during the previous few years reduced the unit costs and the selling prices of railroad services, while the price of water transportation over the Great Lakes had not been proportionately reduced. Shippers of wheat and corn thus found it more profitable to pay the rail rate on traffic to Toledo instead of to Chicago in order to avoid the water haul from Chicago to Toledo. The higher rail rate to Toledo was more than compensated by the savings in the water rate from Chicago to Toledo. In the years prior to the panic of 1873, growth of this all-rail grain traffic substantially enlarged the business of the Wabash. The Wabash, nevertheless, in the next few years fell into financial difficulties, and shortly after the panic the road went into receivership. Despite this and other receiverships in the same area, competition was so severe that rate wars were the normal order of the day. The roads could not settle their rate problems, even in the face of a general agreement in eastern trunk-line territory. The Wabash took the lead in these rate wars, so much so indeed that it came to be characterized as the "Ishmaelite of corporations."[^3] In the middle seventies the road, adhering to these rate-cutting practices, followed the shortsighted policy of capturing traffic by taking full advantage of its strategic location. Such a policy was dangerous. The Chicago-Missouri Valley roads, i.e., the Burlington, Rock Island, Northwestern and Alton, interchanged traffic at Chicago on a friendly basis with non-competitive connections: the Pennsylvania, Michigan Central, Baltimore & Ohio, and the Vanderbilt lines. The western roads traded their eastbound traffic for the westbound traffic of the eastern roads. If the Wabash took the Kansas City and St. Louis traffic east to Toledo, it interchanged business on an unfriendly basis with competitive connections; for, on business moving between Chicago and Toledo, the Wabash competed with its eastern connections.

Despite the rate wars, the Wabash was able by the fall of 1877 to reorganize its property. Although the plan was adopted under the laws of Ohio and the property returned to its stockholders, the title was not entirely clear, and a number of suits tended to obscure its financial future. The price of the stock, therefore, even after the reorganization, dropped to exceptionally low levels. Its physical condition meanwhile was not enviable. Even as late as 1880 the road needed sidings, second track, improved terminals, and additional equipment. Many of its cars were not owned, and were held under car trusts.[^4] The company, furthermore, was manipulating its accounts while awaiting a return to better times. In a public statement issued in March, 1878, for example, it reported earnings for the previous year of over $168,000; yet in a lawsuit a few months later, the treasurer revealed a deficit of over $570,000.[^5]

The road was finally returned to its shareholders in February, 1878. The board of directors included Field, who, like Gould and Sage, was actively interested in stock-market trading. Field was a large holder of cable companies' stocks and of a wide assortment of railroad securities. He was a recognized leader in speculative circles and his following included Tilden, the Democratic candidate for President in 1876. In the dreary days of 1877, when the financial fate of the Wabash hung in the balance, an investigation of the Wabash led to the purchase by Field of a "considerable amount" of its common stock, some at less than one dollar a share.[^6] This turned out to be an important factor in Gould's acquisition of control of the road in 1879 and 1880.

Field was primarily a stock trader and only incidentally a railroad man. When the price of Wabash stock advanced, Field was a seller, and he sold just at the time when Gould was a ready buyer. The president of the road was James A. Roosevelt, a member of the brokerage and banking community of New York City. The new management did not modify the road's traffic policies.

Thus during the depression period, the Wabash, in and out of receivership, under one management or another, was at all times a trouble maker. It could not refrain from the temptation to take advantage of its location.

In the fall of 1878 the Wabash management changed again. The new president was Commodore Garrison, who was then in full control of the Missouri Pacific. Early in 1877 he also acquired an interest in the other direct St. Louis-Kansas City connection—the St. Louis, Kansas City & Northern[^7]—and a few months later his son, W. R. Garrison, vice president of the Missouri Pacific, was elected a member of the Kansas City board. The new management revived a long discussed project—the construction of an extension from its line in northwestern Missouri to Omaha. Such a connection would enable the road to compete with the Iowa Pool for traffic to the Mississippi Valley and beyond, and open up a line from Omaha to St. Louis, sixty miles shorter than any existing route.[^8] The traffic from Omaha to St. Louis via the proposed extension could move east over any one of the numerous connections at St. Louis, including the Wabash.

Garrison in the fall of 1878 thus controlled the Missouri Pacific, held a substantial stock interest in the Kansas City, and headed the management of the Wabash. While the Kansas City was pushing a line to Omaha, Garrison, as president of the Wabash, decided to build a new line to Chicago. He was a realistic trader and, like Gould, he had learned not to place undue reliance upon the promises of others in open competitive battles. In 1878 he learned this lesson again. Despite the traffic agreement which the Kansas City had with the Alton for the interchange of Kansas City business, the latter decided to extend its own line west to that point. Garrison, in order to fight the Alton, decided to get to Chicago by the purchase of a small road with a terminus about one hundred miles southwest of Chicago.

Although Garrison had expansionist tendencies, the directors of the Wabash were not fighting railroad businessmen. Either they were representatives of bankers interested in the preservation of creditor rights, or men with memories—memories of the ill-fated extensions of the road in the early seventies. A number of the directors, large stockholders, had vivid recollections, some by personal experience, of the disastrous results which followed that expansion program. They were fearful of the consequences of the new program and therefore sold the bulk of their stock.[^9]

Garrison, however, convinced of the necessity for a Chicago line, made it clear that, in charge of the destinies of the Wabash, he would press on with the program. The Illinois Central objected strenuously. If the Wabash built to Chicago, it would build to St. Louis. After weeks of negotiation, a settlement was reached and both roads surrendered their construction programs. "We may congratulate," remarked one observer, "the Wabash and Illinois Central roads on their sober second thought...."[^10]

Garrison by acquiring control of the Wabash had placed himself in a position which Gould had vainly contrived to secure. By controlling the two direct lines from Kansas City to St. Louis and the Wabash from St. Louis to a point not far distant from Chicago, Garrison was able to outflank the Omaha-Chicago line of the Iowa Pool roads. By controlling the Wabash, Garrison also could trade with the Hannibal and with the Kansas & Texas at the Mississippi River connections. If skillfully handled, this would give him a controlling influence in the St. Louis railroad strategy. At Kansas City his roads connected with the Kansas Pacific and the Atchison, and if he could make a satisfactory arrangement with the bondholders of the former he could reduce Gould to a position of impotence. Villard, on behalf of the Kansas Pacific's Denver Extension bondholders, could foreclose the mortgage and make Gould's junior securities relatively valueless.

Garrison's election to the Wabash presidency was therefore recognized as presaging a great change in western railroad strategy. It "is a great step in the consolidation of the greatest railway combination ever known," sweepingly announced one financial analyst.[^11]

Despite the belligerence of Garrison and the weakened position of the Kansas Pacific, Gould within a period of four months succeeded in transforming the entire railroad picture in the lower Missouri Valley.

On the face of things the Wabash in 1878 was financially undesirable and the general run-of-mine investor and speculator could see little in its future. The road was not earning its fixed charges. Its prospects, however, were improving. Local traffic in the later months of the year showed exceptional increases, due largely to the heavy grain crop which benefited the freight receipts of all middle-western roads. While the Wabash in June did not earn enough to meet its pay rolls, traffic in the following weeks swelled to "immense proportions."[^12] Despite the heavy demand for wheat, its price was extremely low, and for that reason railroad rates could not be increased. The heavy traffic brought little in higher profit.

That Gould was interested in the unprofitable Wabash, now securely in the hands of Garrison, was apparently suspected by nobody. No observer believed that Garrison would relinquish his plans for expansion and turn his major acquisitions over to Gould. Garrison was not an appeaser and was not frightened by bogies and threats. From the time he fought Cornelius Vanderbilt in the early fifties to the very moment of his acquisition and extension of the Wabash, he was aggressive. At this time, however, he had other projects in mind.

Gould understood the strategic possibilities of the Wabash. Although the Wabash receiver had been discharged for more than a year, title to the property was not yet free. While he was negotiating for the purchase of Garrison's holdings, suits arising out of the receivership and foreclosure were still pending. Despite its clouded legal position and in the face of poor earnings, the price of Wabash stock shortly after the sale of Gould's Union Pacific in late February began to rise on heavy volume. In the first two weeks of March, however, the renewal of legal proceedings reduced its price from 23 to below 18. On the decline as well as on the previous advance, the volume of trading was unusually heavy. On some days during this period the stock, which prior to that time had a quiet market, became the second most active on the exchange. When the stock market turned weak, it was Gould who received credit for the decline. Only ten days after the sale of the Union Pacific stock, a weak market was ascribed to Gould, whose short-selling operations, according to one authoritative source, "seemed to be gathering momentum from its recent successes."[^13] Gould's smoke screen thus promoted his accumulation of Wabash and facilitated his negotiations for the purchase of Garrison's holdings.

So, protected by the speculative judgments of the day that he was interested neither in Northwestern nor in short-selling operations, Gould proceeded quietly to accumulate a large amount of Wabash stock. The first public news of the changing picture came on April 6, when the market was active and excited. A large subscription to the new government 4 per cent bonds was the motivating optimistic factor. Late in the day on news of the resignation of Garrison as president, the price of Wabash suddenly dropped to 19. It was thought that he had sold his stock before resigning, but not until about a week later was it learned that Garrison had sold. Even then it was not known that Gould and his associates had secured control. A week after Garrison's resignation Wabash resumed its upward price trend, and on the thirteenth of April, in heavy trading making it the second most active stock, the price rose to almost 21. Next day the trading was again heavy, but the price of Wabash remained about the same. Gould thus had a period of about two months in which to accumulate Wabash stock on the open market. His handling of this problem must be considered as masterful. His activity was kept secret; even the most penetrating of financial and market observers did not suspect the truth.

Gould's buying was aided by the management's passive policy over the lawsuits against the company. The officers made no move to protect the suits against the Wabash for receivership and foreclosure. Field, who early in 1878 had become a director of the Wabash, felt these legal actions keenly. He believed that the Wabash should enter suits for conspiracy against those who were manufacturing claims against the road in order to depress the value of its securities. In the fall of 1878, however, Field relinquished his Wabash directorship. These lawsuits kept the price of Wabash securities low, thus reducing the price Gould had to pay in order to acquire control. Short-sellers and nervous stockholders hurried to sell, and in conjunction with sales by large capitalists, who sold because of fear of the results of the Garrison expansion program, a substantial supply of stock at low prices was available. It is probable that by the first week in April, when Garrison resigned, Gould had purchased control of the Wabash. Based upon a price of about twenty for the stock, a majority interest cost him less than $2,000,000.

In assuming control, Gould took pains to select a proper managerial leadership. This was one of Gould's strong points. He was usually careful to select just the right man for the right job and to keep that man only as long as necessary to do that job. The Wabash had long been a speculative property. Gould was now planning an expansion program and was anxious to build up a strong following which would enable him the more readily to secure the necessary capital. Gould therefore chose Field to head the Wabash. Field, though not a railroad man, had many supporters among moneyed men who trusted him and looked to him for leadership. He was still a holder of Wabash stock. The Wabash under the leadership of a man with the background and reputation of Field would probably be able to enlist the support of an army of security holders. Field at first refused to accept this new responsibility. Precisely what proposals Gould made to Field to induce him to change his mind are not known. In any event on the sixteenth of April, 1879, he agreed to become president on condition that he receive no salary, and that he serve only until a good man with railroad experience be secured.[^14]

In order to strengthen the board, Gould succeeded also in enlisting the services of Joy—another strong personality, and for many years a leader of the Boston group which had promoted many prosperous lines known collectively as the Joy roads. Gould recognized Joy's ability and appreciated the value of his following.

Despite his disassociation from active participation in the affairs of major roads, Joy continued his interest in the transportation problems of Detroit. He was convinced that the Vanderbilt monopoly of that city's transportation facilities was inimical to its best interests. Joy saw in the Wabash an opportunity to develop competition with the Vanderbilt lines. He had already made a beginning in this direction. From a point at the eastern tip of Indiana (Butler) to Logansport, a road under construction since the Civil War years had been finished just prior to the panic. Together with four other roads it formed a short route between Detroit and Indianapolis. Strategically the road was highly important to a number of eastern trunk lines as a southwestern traffic outlet. Its usefulness to the Lake Shore, for example, is revealed in the statement of the general manager in 1875, that the value of this connection to that road had been "thoroughly demonstrated."[^15] The road became financially embarrassed and late in 1877 Joy, on behalf of himself and other bondholders, bought control at a foreclosure sale. A relatively short extension would bring this road into Detroit, and, in conjunction with the enlarged Wabash, give Detroit a new line to Chicago.

Joy was not interested in the Wabash and he therefore refused Gould's request that he join the directorate. Gould's declaration that the Wabash would proceed immediately to make a Toledo-Detroit connection, however, won Joy over. Even then he joined the board only with the understanding that he would not share any of the responsibility for the road's finances.[^16] Joy's acceptance of a place on the Wabash board was a momentous event. Joy had a host of friends in England who trusted him and willingly bought Wabash securities because of his association with that property. Gould's selection of Joy as one of his associates on the Wabash reflected again his uncanny genius in selecting the right man for a particular purpose.

In addition to Field and Joy, Gould enlisted the services of his two close associates, Sage and Dillon, now recognized as his partners in most all of his corporate affiliations. Two additional personalities with a broad background of railroad experience in the new Wabash system completed the board's new personnel. A. L. Hopkins was an able operating man who had served in an important capacity on the Wabash, and the other, Solon Humphreys, was a New York banker intimately acquainted with the financial problems of the Kansas City—soon to serve as the western part of the new Wabash system. With Sage, Dillon, Field, Hopkins, Humphreys and himself, Gould created a powerful executive committee. "It would not be easy," wrote one commentator, "to combine more intellectual and financial strength and railway experience" than in these six.[^17] A New York daily assured its readers in analyzing the significance of the new Wabash board that "The country will wait for some time to behold a man more gifted than Mr. Jay Gould."[^18]

In order to exploit the traffic advantages of the Wabash, Gould decided to acquire one of the lines connecting the Wabash at St. Louis with Kansas City and therefore with the Kansas Pacific. This was a momentous step pregnant with far-reaching consequences. The through Kansas City-Toledo route would make the participating roads competitors of most all of the east-west roads from Chicago east.[^19] To place the Wabash with a St. Louis-Kansas City line would stir up violent competitive conflicts, and in the picturesque language of a railroad traffic man, "would establish a bridge over the 'bloody chasm.'"[^20] Garrison's control of the Kansas City line was slight. A large block of the stock of this road was held by Humphreys who had long been on the board of directors. A number of financial institutions who were bondholders in the predecessor of the Kansas City company had received stock of the successor company in the reorganization of the early seventies. Institutions were not anxious to retain the stock of such a financially weak company. They were therefore ready to sell at any substantial price advance. They thus supplied Gould with considerable stock in the spring and summer of 1879.

The number of shares held by Garrison is unknown. The Kansas City's stock in the early months of 1879 was even more laggard than the Wabash, with the price fluctuating aimlessly at about 10 to 12. Its market movements in March and April suspiciously resembled those of the Wabash, and on both active and on quiet market days, the stock of the road turned over in heavy volume. Late in April it became particularly active and for a time was one of the market leaders.

Gould's acquisition of control of the road in the summer of 1879 was not to the liking of Garrison, nor was it accomplished with his consent. Gould by his spectacular market successes in the Kansas Pacific, Union Pacific and Wabash, had attracted an important speculative following, many of whom as stockholders of the Kansas City were ready to respond to his leadership. When Gould in the midst of a rising stock market submitted a plan for the union of that road and the Wabash on the basis of an exchange of stocks, little opposition was encountered, and by the fall of 1879, the consolidation was an accomplished fact.

The strength of this new corporate alliance between the Wabash and the Kansas City was soon sensed by informed financial observers. The election of Gould and his associates to the Wabash board was "full of speculative significance and interest," declared a leading metropolitan daily paper.[^21] As on so many other occasions, Gould was able to raise visions of future possibilities in the minds of his contemporaries. The common ownership of the Kansas City and the Wabash was pictured as foreshadowing a new through route from the Atlantic to the Pacific which would include the Erie, the Atlantic—then in receivership and still independent of the Erie—the Wabash, the Kansas City, the Kansas Pacific, and the Union Pacific. An authoritative Chicago railroad journal concluded a description of the change in management and the execution of some trackage agreements between the Wabash and other roads with the observation that the Union Pacific managers had thereby achieved "a direct outlet under their own control from Kansas City to the Lakes."[^22]

In less than three months after Gould had apparently retired from the transcontinental business, he had returned stronger than ever. What he had failed to do as a representative of the Union Pacific in fighting the Iowa Pool, he had now as an individual market trader succeeded in doing. In control of the new through line from Omaha and Kansas City to Toledo, Gould could now outflank the Iowa Pool roads. The local business of the Wabash and of the Kansas City was large and growing, and the two roads, according to journalistic observers, could also command a part of the large amount of freight delivered by the Union Pacific and Kansas Pacific to connections at Omaha and Kansas City.[^23] With this volume of eastbound traffic under his control Gould could seemingly ignore the Iowa Pool lines and cut rates on transcontinental business. If he reduced rates on business moving east from Omaha and Kansas City, he could divert some share of the traffic of the Iowa lines to the route under his control. At the eastern end where the Pennsylvania, the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Lake Shore were eager for their share of the transcontinental traffic, competition would also enable him to play off one road against another. A diversion from the Burlington lines to the new Wabash route would cost the eastern trunk lines some of the transcontinental business formerly received at Chicago, but part of the loss they could make up if they succeeded in negotiating a new traffic alliance with the Wabash route at Toledo.

The heart of Gould's new railroad route, aside from its broad transcontinental implications, lay at St. Louis. Although the rates between Chicago and Omaha were relatively high, the eastbound rates from Chicago in comparison with those from St. Louis were low. This was due to the application by eastern trunk lines of the mileage principle. Commercial interests, which had long contended for lower rates eastbound from St. Louis, argued that a rate structure based upon the "mileage principle" would give St. Louis, as well as the railroads, considerable advantages.[^24]

Hence any move made by Gould to assert the rate equality of the St. Louis roads would prove to be popular with the local community. Gould, alive to these opportunities, acted speedily, and the early results were successful. In scarcely more than a week after he took control of the destinies of the Wabash, he carried the fight into the camp of his enemies. The Wabash offered to carry freight from the eastern seaboard to the Missouri River points at the prevailing Chicago rates. Here was a direct attack on the rate structure of the Iowa Pool lines. In order to compete, it was necessary that the Pool lines carry freight from Chicago to the Missouri River points for nothing, unless their eastern connections at Chicago agreed to share in the rate cuts. Almost immediately the joint executive committee of the eastern trunk lines, the agency through which the eastern railroad pool had been operating since the spring of 1877, met but no settlement was reached. Three days later the committee meeting again decided upon halfway measures and tried to compromise. The Wabash, however, was insistent. "If our demands be granted by the commissioner," declared the Wabash management, "our recent rates will be withdrawn; if they are not, the war has just begun."[^25] Despite mounting public opposition, the eastern pool had worked well but a concession made to Gould promised to upset the delicate balance. The age-old question now confronted those who in the interests of peace appease the aggressors. If the demands of the Wabash were met, and the existing key rates reduced, what additional concessions would other roads make and what additional breaks in the rate structure would follow?

This embarrassing problem obviously did not concern Gould who was strengthening his lines in order to make even further demands and thus strengthen his position. His bargaining power was improved by the heavy volume of eastbound traffic then moving. Business over the mid-western roads, including the Wabash, was rapidly reaching record proportions, and the Pennsylvania and the Baltimore & Ohio, in order to secure a long haul, made a bid for the Wabash business.

The failure of Cornelius Vanderbilt to expand the Lake Shore south and west from the main Toledo-Chicago line gave Gould also the opportunity to exert pressure on that road. For some years the Lake Shore had close traffic relations with the Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & Indianapolis,[^26] extending southwest from its main line at Cleveland. Although title to the stock of the road was in question, its properties appeared to be under the control of the Erie, and the union of these two lines threatened to deprive the Lake Shore of a major connection for its southwestern business. The Bee Line, furthermore, had been a serious competitor of the Wabash in the latter's own local territory and was described by a contemporary observer as "for years the main obstacle to the success of the Wabash...."[^27]

Through the growing strength of his traffic position, Gould was able to negotiate to a successful conclusion a pooling arrangement, long under consideration between the Wabash, the Bee Line, and another road. These three lines agreed for a five-year period to divide their earnings, and to authorize an executive committee to maintain rates and divide traffic.[^28] Gould thereby acquired a whip hand over Vanderbilt in directing the flow of southwestern traffic to or from the Lake Shore at Toledo.

Thus fortified, the Wabash early in July renewed its demand for rate equality. Gould, on behalf of the road, insisted that more transcontinental traffic westbound be moved over the Wabash route via Toledo and less over the competitive route via Chicago and the Iowa lines. The trunk lines ignored the request. The Wabash management, however, was not discouraged, since by adjustment of rates it could get a proper share of the Pacific coast business. That clearly meant a rate war for which the eastern trunk lines were not yet ready.[^29]

Gould and his Wabash were therefore appeased. Albert Fink, commissioner of the eastern trunk-line executive committee, recognized again, as he had two months before, the justice of the Wabash claim. The trunk lines agreed to route over the Wabash any freight so designated, and to give it a higher division of the new New York-St. Louis through rate. Thus the eastern lines agreed to give the Wabash both more business and a higher price. It was even reported that the New York Central-Lake Shore route had agreed to deliver all of its California-bound freight to the Wabash at Toledo and that other trunk lines would do the same.[^30]

Gould by the early summer of 1879 had therefore re-established himself as a dominating force in the American railroad industry. Profits from his railroad holdings and security trading gave him the necessary cash and credit to enable him to proceed with other far-reaching plans. His profits were large in the Wabash and in the Kansas City, and even larger in the stocks and junior bonds of the Kansas Pacific. No sooner was he in control of the new railroad enterprises, than he turned to the task of exploiting their telegraph possibilities. Failure to achieve more than a temporary defensive success with his Atlantic & Pacific in 1877 was due partly to the judicial interpretation of the Western Union exclusive railroad-telegraph contracts. Only a few months after his surrender of the Atlantic & Pacific, the United States Supreme Court changed its mind, and thereby changed the law of the land. In October of that year the court asserted the jurisdiction of the federal government over all forms of communication and declared that the jurisdiction of the federal government extended to the telegraph business. If a railroad made a contract with a telegraph company giving the latter exclusive permission to build a right of way on its railroad lines, the contract could not be invalidated by federal or state action. If, however, the railroad with which the telegraph company had the contract voluntarily agreed to permit another telegraph company to build a line on its right of way, the courts of the country could not interfere.[^31]

Under this interpretation of the Western Union railroad contracts, Gould could, as the controlling factor of a road, make an agreement with any telegraph company for another right of way, and thus invite wholesale duplication of the telegraph system. Gould was not the man to hesitate to take such a far-reaching step merely because it might be uneconomic.

His first move to build up a new competitive telegraph system was, as usual, unobtrusive. Late in April, 1879, he appeared as one of the three incorporators of the Union Telegraph Company with a nominal capital stock of $10,000,000. Gould took half of the stock, and D. H. Bates and C. A. Tinker each took one-quarter. Bates was superintendent of the Atlantic & Pacific; and Tinker held the same position on the Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph property. Neither of these two incorporators had any funds; and Gould provided them with the means to finance their subscription. Only a small amount of cash was thus raised. Funds needed to finance construction and expansion came from bond and stock sales of a construction company. This imposing capital stock of $10,000,000 must not, of course, be taken seriously. It was no index to the cash, property or services invested in the enterprise. The nucleus of the new corporation was a small competitive line, the Central Union Telegraph, which began business about six months before. Although it had few miles in operation, it had an ambitious program. The promoter of the company, a Mr. Owen, had vainly tried to interest the Western Union. The company did not consider the venture seriously, and a person connected with the Western Union said, "I don't believe it is a legitimate enterprise. I believe that persons interested in it never intend to build the line."[^32] Other and more impartial observers took more kindly to Gould's telegraph venture. A Chicago railroad trade journal, reflecting probably the judgment of those who yearned for more telegraph competition, remarked that there was "every reason to believe that this [was] no blackmailing scheme organized with the especial object in view of selling out as soon as perfected at a handsome figure; but one that [was] a bona fide effort on the part of the railroads to secure to themselves the profits obtainable from their own resources."[^33] The project was described as one which would connect with the Wabash line, and extend over the roads just passed under Gould's control and beyond to San Francisco. Again Gould displayed his ability for leading informed people to think of his ideas in terms of extravagant hopes and possibilities.

A few weeks later, on May 15, Gould broadened the project by the incorporation of the American Union Telegraph, capitalized at $13,000,000. Through a construction company he sold securities to the general speculative public. He immediately expressed the same underdog psychology that had been so successful on the Erie more than a decade ago. He thundered against the "great monopoly"; he would slay the monopolistic devil.[^34]

His next competitive move was shrewdly made. Taking advantage of the newly rendered Supreme Court law of the land, he had the Wabash make a contract with the new American Union for a competitive and duplicate right of way over its line. He even tried to outdo the law of the land, and ousted the Western Union from the lines of the Wabash. The Western Union raced to the court for protection, and the court declared that while the Western Union could not be excluded from the lines of the Wabash, neither could the Western Union through its exclusive contract exclude the American Union. Both companies could build duplicate lines on the railroad right of way.[^35] A few weeks later Gould followed an identical policy over the lines of the Kansas City. He ousted the Western Union and made a contract with the new American Union. Again the Western Union asked for an injunction and again the court refused.[^36]

While these court struggles were going on, Congressional action strengthened Gould's position almost as much as the Supreme Court had in October of 1877. After extensive hearings and prolonged parliamentary moves Congress, in the form of a rider to an army bill, authorized the railroads to do a commercial telegraph business.[^37] This permitted Gould, through his railroads and in conjunction with the American Union, to enter into competition with the Western Union in all parts of the country. The interesting speculative opportunities which this legislative permission made possible was foreseen in the hearings held when the bill was under consideration. "If the most unconscionable of all stock-jobbers," declared counsel for the Western Union before a Congressional committee in February of 1879, "had sought to provide himself with a club for the threatening of his enemies could he have devised anything more happy than the option which this bill gives to parade from time to time a possible combination of railroads to imperil the value of telegraph franchises, and, consequently, the market value of stocks?"[^38]

With this legislation and the new court decisions to sustain him, Gould initiated a program of telegraph expansion. He discovered that a considerable mileage of poles and wires was owned by the railroads and operated by the Western Union on terminable leases. Wherever possible, the American Union acquired control of these lines and built new ones. In his efforts to penetrate the larger cities of the country, he encountered other difficulties. It was necessary to secure consent of the local council, and frequently exceptionally high prices were insisted upon by the city solons. Such was the case in Philadelphia. In other cities, the situation was such that the American Union had to use physical force to achieve its end. In Buffalo, for example, competition led to the cutting of wires and poles and to other riotous proceedings.[^39]

At the same time Gould took steps to give the American Union a transatlantic cable service independent of any connection with the Western Union. To expedite matters he arranged for the organization of a French cable company with which, on behalf of the American Union, he made an exclusive and preferential business arrangement.

Nevertheless, the Western Union still refused to take the new movement seriously. The steps so far taken by Gould were indeed only beginners. He had spent most of July in Europe negotiating other transactions and had not yet had the time to divulge his major aims. The Western Union directors on the other hand believed that upon his return from Europe Gould would concern himself with his railroads, and that the American Union—the "opposition company"[^40]—would soon be broken up.

By midsummer of 1879 Gould's power as a factor in the telegraph industry and as a leading force in the middle-western railroad picture was strong and growing. Through his surprising acquisition of two financially weak but strategically located railroads between Kansas City and Toledo, he had succeeded in wresting notable concessions from the powerful eastern trunk-line pool. He was preparing further blows against one of the most powerful non-railroad enterprises of the day—the Western Union. That concern was represented on its board by strong financial interests: Vanderbilt; Morgan of Drexel, Morgan & Co., one of the leading firms in the railroad and government bond financing field; Taylor, the aged and eminent executive and major owner of the National City Bank; and Edwin D. Morgan, formerly Governor of New York and one of the wealthy and influential men of the time. Against all of these, Gould was about to pit his individual leadership, his comparatively limited resources, and his amazing resourcefulness and ingenuity, financial and trading ability. While he expanded his telegraph enterprise, he flung the Wabash strategic influence into the camp of eastern railroad and financial magnates. By ruthless pressure he extracted concessions that brought him to a position of leadership and influence in the eastern railroad community. He could no longer be ignored in any eastern or middle-western railroad strategy, and neither, for other reasons, could he be ignored in far-western affairs. And only a few months before he had been widely advertised as ready for enforced retirement.

---

## Notes for Chapter X

[^1]: Buffalo Commercial Advertiser, cited in R. R. Gaz., Aug. 13, 1870, 464-5.
[^2]: R. R. Gaz., June 29, 1872, 273.
[^3]: Public, Oct. 25, 1877, 265; see also Ry. Review, April 26, 1879, 173.
[^4]: R. R. Gaz., March 25, 1881, 171.
[^5]: New York Tribune, June 18, 1878.
[^6]: This statement was made by Field in State of Massachusetts, General Court, Joint Committee on Claims, New York & New England Railroad second mortgage bond sale. Hearing on the petitions of Cyrus W. Field and others before the Joint Committee on Claims, 1886, hereinafter referred to as the New England Bond Investigation, 522.
[^7]: Known hereafter as the Kansas City.
[^8]: Am. R. R. Journal, Jan. 18, 1879, 76.
[^9]: This account of the expansion program of Garrison is based on the following: New York World, Nov. 22, 1878; Chicago Tribune, Nov. 27, 1878; R. R. Gaz., Nov. 29, 1878, 579.
[^10]: A New York newspaper, cited in Ry. World, Dec. 28, 1878, 1251.
[^11]: Public, Nov. 28, 1878, 339. The announcement of the Garrison management served as the occasion for a comprehensive editorial analysis of the Wabash in R. R. Gaz., Nov. 29, 1878, 579.
[^12]: This statement was made by a local newspaper in the heart of Wabash territory, the Lafayette Journal, cited in R. R. Gaz., Sept. 13, 1878, 452.
[^13]: Phila. North American, Feb. 27, 1879.
[^14]: So stated by Field in New England Bond Investigation, 522.
[^15]: Joy papers, John Newell to Joy, Sept. 8, 1875.
[^16]: Ry. Review, May 3, 1879, 186; London Railway News, Oct. 11, 1884, 580.
[^17]: Stockholder, Nov. 18, 1879, 98.
[^18]: New York Mail, cited in Stockholder, Oct. 2, 1879.
[^19]: See supra, p. 191.
[^20]: State of Missouri, Statements and Testimony of Railroad Managers and others before Committee on Railroads and Internal Improvements of the Extra Session of the 34th General Assembly of Missouri, Jefferson City, 1887, 376, W. M. Sage of the Rock Island.
[^21]: New York Tribune, April 22, 1879.
[^22]: Ry. Review, May 3, 1879, 187.
[^23]: In fact the interchange traffic of the Union Pacific was relatively small. In 1880, for example, California freight reaching the trunk lines was about equal to the business of Evansville, Indiana; to one-quarter that of Cleveland; to one-seventh that of Pittsburgh; and to one-fifteenth that of Buffalo. The rail freight received by the trunk lines from Chicago every five days was more than that received from California in the whole year, R. R. Gaz., April 7, 1882, 210.
[^24]: Memorial of the Merchants' Exchange Freight Committee, cited in Public, Dec. 21, 1876, 393.
[^25]: New York Tribune, April 29, 1879.
[^26]: Known hereafter as the Bee Line.
[^27]: Public, July 31, 1879, 71.
[^28]: R. R. Gaz., Aug. 1, 1879, 422; see also New York Tribune, July 29, 1879.
[^29]: This new demand was so astonishing that the well-informed Railroad Gazette refused to believe it. "The story seemed to be of a piece with many others that [had] been widely published recently—that is, without any foundation in fact or reason other than somebody's desire to get certain roads talked about." R. R. Gaz., Aug. 1, 1879, 416.
[^30]: See for these negotiations New York Tribune, July 25, 1879; July 28, 1879; Public, July 31, 1879, 71.
[^31]: Pensacola Telegraph Co. vs. Western Union, 96 U.S., 1 (1877).
[^32]: New York Tribune, April 30, 1879.
[^33]: Ry. Review, May 10, 1879, 198.
[^34]: This is the language used in the stock prospectus of the American Union, according to counsel in a suit against the Western Union merger, New York Tribune, Jan. 29, 1881.
[^35]: Western Union vs. American Union Telegraph, Circuit Court, Indiana District, in Federal Cases, Vol. XXIX, 190-1.
[^36]: New York Tribune, Aug. 2, 1879; R. R. Gaz., Aug. 8, 1879, 431.
[^37]: Land-Grant Telegraph Lines, Report No. 3501, House of Representatives, 49th Congress, 2nd Session, 1886, 26, 31, Reiff.
[^38]: Competing Telegraph Lines, Minutes of a Hearing before the Committee on Railroads, Report No. 805, Senate, 45th Congress, 3rd Session, 1879, 16-7, G. P. Lowrey.
[^39]: R. R. Gaz., Sept. 19, 1879, 503. In Philadelphia, clashes with local municipal authorities accompanied the competitive struggle of the American Union against the Western Union, according to the Philadelphia Times, Aug. 20, 1879.
[^40]: New York Tribune, Aug. 8, 1879.