# Chapter XI - Gould Tempts W. H. Vanderbilt

In expanding the Wabash in eastern territory, in carving out new through routes for the movement of traffic via Chicago, Toledo and Detroit, Gould clashed head-on with Vanderbilt—probably the country's wealthiest railroad stockholder. His holdings in 1879 were concentrated largely in the New York Central, the Harlem, and the Lake Shore. In addition he had large commitments in the New Haven, New England (successor of the old Boston, Hartford & Erie), Michigan Central, Canada Southern, and Northwestern.

In American business and railroad history he must be set down as a classic example of one who failed to exploit his business strength in a free competitive battlefield. He rarely took the initiative to seize a vantage point from which he could dictate the detailed negotiations; he was almost always on the defensive. In such a position repeated attacks by his opponents forced him into a negative strategy. He was unable to develop mature and well-conceived plans to overcome his opponent so as to make him, and not himself, sue for terms of peace. And when the opposition persisted in its aggressiveness, he frequently sued for peace. He thereby became one of the country's greatest business appeasers. In one contest after another Vanderbilt made the concessions necessary to the termination of a business war. In the struggle over the export differential rates, in the telegraph war between the Western Union and the Atlantic & Pacific, which have already been reviewed, the contest was settled upon terms adverse to those interests represented by Vanderbilt. He was the stronger party in the telegraph contest, and by no means the weaker in the differential; yet in both he refused to fight a protracted war and reluctantly accepted terms which produced a temporary peace.

Vanderbilt furthermore could not adopt a definite policy and patiently, consistently, and with perseverance continue that policy until its logical, and if necessary its bitter, end was realized. He acted in spurts; sometimes he moved haltingly and then suddenly he rushed ahead with celerity and decisiveness. He could not be depended upon to follow a policy rigorously, once he had adopted it. It was not a mere change of mind dictated by changing circumstances which was such an emphatic side of his character, but rather the lack of fortitude necessary to hold out against a combination of adverse circumstances. He would savagely assail a company, a line of corporate policy, and even a particular personality, and a short time later make peace with the person or situation thus assailed.

Although some of Vanderbilt's actions and policies have already been examined, it is in connection with Gould's exploitation of the Wabash in eastern territory that his peculiar business characteristics were revealed against a comprehensive background of railroad strategy.

The consolidated Wabash in the hands of Gould was a dangerous business weapon. It was the only railroad which connected Kansas City, St. Louis, and the upper Mississippi River gateways with the Great Lakes at a point east of Chicago. The Wabash, therefore, was at the same time an eastern and a western road. Its traffic and rate policies affected the rate structure of at least two important traffic regions.

In the East the road connected with all major eastern trunk lines. It competed with the Pennsylvania's affiliates from Indianapolis to St. Louis, crossing its leased lines at numerous points in Indiana and Illinois. At Toledo it joined with the Vanderbilt system, and by a short extension, could reach the lines of the Atlantic which were soon again to be united into the Erie system. The Wabash, furthermore, by some new construction could connect with Detroit and there enter traffic relations with two lines which extended to Buffalo and beyond to New England.

The Wabash had the power, therefore, by pursuing diverse policies, to divert a large volume of eastbound business to any one of a number of lines. It could follow a traffic policy which would tend to harmonize conflicting interests, and, even at the expense of a loss in volume, tend to stabilize the rate structure, or it could exploit its strategic location even at the expense of slashing rate reductions, in order to collect the largest volume of traffic for its lines.

Of the three trunk lines which connected with the Wabash, the one which appeared most likely to be challenged by Gould was the Vanderbilt system. As owner of the short line along the southern shore from Buffalo to Chicago, and as the holder of the two outlets from Detroit, it was, strategically speaking, a powerful middle-western system. In its lack of connections with the Southwest, it had, however, a vital weakness. Only two independently owned railroad outlets into this region remained—the Wabash and the Bee Line, in neither of which the Lake Shore had any stock interests. The Lake Shore received a heavy volume of traffic from the Wabash at Toledo, and if Gould, in charge of its destinies, decided to follow an aggressive policy in the east he could divert traffic from the Lake Shore to another line. And he decided to do just that.

By the summer of 1879 when Gould opened up with his attack on the Vanderbilt system in the Middle West, Vanderbilt had invited a new competitive enemy by expanding his holdings in Burlington territory through his acquisition of a substantial stock interest in the Northwestern. As a counterweight, Forbes and Perkins of the Burlington considered the idea of buying some shares in the Pennsylvania. Forbes however was cautious and merely suggested that it would be a good plan to cultivate friendly relations, believing that all the objectives of an alliance with the Pennsylvania, such as those suggested by Perkins, could be secured without any stock holdings.[^1]

At the very time when Vanderbilt was acquiring his Northwestern securities, thereby inviting the enmity of the Burlington, he was attacked by Gould in the east. Despite his power and influence, Vanderbilt found himself on the defensive, just as Garrison and the Union Pacific board were then being forced into the same position.

Though the Wabash had a heavy volume of traffic, it was nevertheless forced by circumstances to do business at low rates. It served a territory which was criss-crossed by trunk lines fighting eagerly for a share of the through traffic. Since it had relatively little local business entirely free from the competition of other lines, it was unable to make up, on that traffic, what was lost on the competitive traffic. Nearly everywhere it competed with roads which carried business to the Lakes by shorter routes. Rates were therefore low; in 1878, for example, its ton-mile rate was only 0.83 cents. Competitors in southern and central Illinois, unaffected by trunk-line competition, had rates which ranged from 1.06 cents to 1.44 cents.[^2] An increase in the rate level appeared to be the wisest policy. A small rise on existing traffic would produce more profits than lower rates accompanied by more volume.

Gould, however, had no intention of promoting rate stability. He saw opportunities for increasing the business of the Wabash and of other properties which he then controlled, and perhaps of still others which he was planning to control. He obtained results on one property by exploiting another. Such a policy, however, made stabilization impossible; his move was met by a countermove, and a war was on.

Peace between Gould and Vanderbilt was further obstructed by another difference. Joy had joined the Wabash board and lent his prestige to the Gould group because of his interest in a connection between Detroit and Chicago, independent of Vanderbilt. To complete such a line it was first necessary to gain access from Detroit to Toledo; but both of the Detroit-Toledo roads were owned by Vanderbilt. East of Detroit connecting that city with Buffalo were two trunk lines: one, the Great Western, was independent of Vanderbilt; the other was the Canada Southern whose interest had been guaranteed by the New York Central. Another line, the Grand Trunk, connecting Detroit with Portland, Maine, took steps to secure a Chicago connection. Its efforts in that direction were, however, blocked by Vanderbilt. Gould meanwhile had taken steps to carry out his promise to Joy to build a Detroit line. The road would be built, he declared, as rapidly "as new money can do the job."[^3] Arrangements were made with the Great Western to allow the Wabash to use its Detroit terminal facilities, and a contract was negotiated with the Grand Trunk to permit it to use the proposed extension.[^4] Differences developed almost immediately and the agreements were never ratified. Gould thereupon reached another understanding with the Great Western, informal in character, and not reduced to writing, for the joint construction of the Detroit line. This contract also was never consummated. Meanwhile discussions continued with Vanderbilt. Nobody, declared Gould, would profit from the construction of a parallel line, while everybody, he argued suavely, would be best served by the existing Vanderbilt road. Vanderbilt refused, however, to lease either of his two properties on any terms, though he would grant trackage facilities. A contract was drawn up affording running rights to the Wabash, Grand Trunk and Great Western. Gould laid down his customary ultimatum: accept or refuse in seven days. Vanderbilt refused, and the refusal, strangely enough, arose from an insubstantial difference of opinion over the valuation of the property.[^5]

Negotiations were now terminated. A subsidiary company controlled by the Wabash was organized; a bond issue was created, and Gould, Sage, Dillon and Joy subscribed liberally. Adequate capital thus flowed into the venture; and the public was soon provided with a badly needed competitive facility. Gould and Vanderbilt, meanwhile, made a strong fight to seize the line which for some years had served as part of the through route between Indianapolis and Detroit. The road made connections with the Vanderbilt line, the Pennsylvania and the Baltimore & Ohio. With this road in his hands, Vanderbilt would have had the beginning of an extension into middle-western territory in western Indiana, from which he could, either by construction or acquisition, acquire a route to St. Louis. To Gould the road was equally strategic. With this property in his possession he would have a connection to northeastern Indiana from which the Detroit line could be built without passing through the congested Toledo terminal facilities.

In the contest for control, Gould was the victor. His shrewdness in selecting Joy as a member of the Wabash board of directors was now revealed, for in the reorganization of the road, Joy and his associates had acquired a majority interest. Because of its light traffic density, and the competition of surrounding trunk lines, rates were exceedingly low. The Wabash nevertheless agreed to lease the property at a relatively high rental.

The acquisition of this road made it impossible for Vanderbilt (except of course by the construction of new mileage) to invade Wabash territory. Vanderbilt meanwhile backed down in his fight with the Grand Trunk. Concluding that he could gain nothing by holding up its line to Chicago, he accordingly sold the small road which enabled the Grand Trunk to complete its Chicago line.

While Vanderbilt was thus surrendering to the Grand Trunk, Gould was making grand promises to the Great Western. He convinced that road that a vast flow of traffic from the Wabash would eventually move over its tracks via the new Detroit line of the Wabash. The two roads agreed to divide the through rate, but not on the basis generally used, of their contribution to the joint service, either in terms of mileage or in the use of terminal facilities. The Great Western would haul the Wabash cars over its line for a low price per car. The latter would thus have a through route to Buffalo and the use of the terminal facilities of the Great Western both in Detroit and Buffalo. It would also be able without consulting the other Buffalo roads to fix rates to that city.

This agreement was criticized by a group of the Great Western's stockholders. The management, however, justified the contract. The defense was a tribute to the matchless skill of Gould in presenting to his allies for the moment business promises in terms of business realities. Said the Great Western management, "... the Wabash Railway of today is not the Wabash of yesterday. The Wabash of today is, if not the greatest, one of the greatest systems of railway communications in the world." The road, it argued further, by a connection with the Union Pacific, was part of a route which reached halfway to San Francisco. Finally, continued the statement, one of the directors of the Wabash is "the principal of that line," referring of course to the Union Pacific.[^6] This statement was made at a time when Gould had sold out a large block of his Union Pacific, when he was busily engaged in forming a combination through the Kansas Pacific to compete with the Union Pacific and to force it to take over this competitive system. The complex adverse interests which Gould was then building up against the Union Pacific was not observable, even by well-informed people in the railroad industry.

Gould had again put Vanderbilt on the defensive. Vanderbilt now recognized that he could not have both the heavy volume of Wabash eastbound traffic and a monopoly of the Detroit business. Gould had already diverted some business away from the Lake Shore; for some months "large quantities" of freight had been moving over the Pennsylvania.[^7] By October Vanderbilt had made up his mind that he could have the Wabash business at Toledo only if he made the necessary concessions. Late in that month, the traffic executives of the Wabash and of the New York Central conferred,[^8] and by this time presumably the agreement for traffic interchange was almost ready. Gould, however, was not yet ready to settle; for he had new demands of a financial character.

Vanderbilt owned such a large proportion of the stock of the New York Central that the property was looked upon as a family road. Vanderbilt personally had been criticized for corporate errors and abuses. In 1879 these criticisms were brought to a head by a committee of the New York State Legislature in the so-called Hepburn investigation. Vanderbilt felt this criticism keenly and he appeared unable to stand up against the resolute attacks of public opinion. He did not have the stern fabric of his father, who could follow his sound business instincts regardless of the opposition. Perhaps it might be more charitable to say that in view of the passage of the four or five depression years, the currents of public opinion could no longer be ignored. Whatever the true cause may be, Vanderbilt decided to sell a large block—250,000 shares—of the New York Central stock.

Suddenly, while these negotiations for the sale of the New York Central stock were pending, a panic broke out on the Stock Exchange. The reported sale of the New York Central stock under these distressing circumstances could hardly be believed, a keen newspaper critic of Gould stating that the reported story of the sale was made up out of "whole cloth."[^9] The story was created, so it was declared, only to precipitate a break in the stock market.

In the midst of these discussions, carried on for the Wabash by Field, came the news that Gould had bought the Missouri Pacific. The position of the Wabash was greatly strengthened. Except for the Alton and the weak and recently reorganized Frisco, Gould controlled all the lines between St. Louis and Kansas City. He now controlled more eastbound traffic, and his bargaining power with Vanderbilt was thereby enhanced. He now demanded as a price for his Wabash business that he be given a participation in the syndicate then in process of formation for the sale of the New York Central stock and a membership on the New York Central board. He threatened, upon learning of Vanderbilt's objection to his terms, to send both the Wabash and the Union Pacific business over the Baltimore & Ohio.[^10] A few days after the market break, Vanderbilt sold $25,000,000 of the New York Central stock to a Drexel, Morgan syndicate, which included Gould and his two associates, Sage and Field.

Gould's prestige was increased by his association with one of the country's leading bankers. He was now in the best of company. His banking associations promised to facilitate the financing of many transactions that characterized his activities in the next few years. This new banking connection soon helped him to secure another bit of profitable financial business. Huntington decided to sell 50,000 shares of the Central Pacific, with a six months' option for another 50,000. A number of financial houses, including Kuhn Loeb & Co., and Fisk & Hatch, were in the syndicate; so was Gould.

To some writers the New York Central agreement was looked upon as marking a union of the two great railroad interests which for so long had been hostile. Gould, it was said, was the most important railroad man in the country. One, in a burst of reckless enthusiasm, gave him credit for controlling more than 10,000 miles, including the Northwestern, the Rock Island, the Hannibal, and numerous other properties;[^11] while another referred to the "practical consolidation" of the Gould and Vanderbilt interests.[^12] The potential power of the Gould-Vanderbilt alliance impressed not only outside observers but some railroad men as well.

Despite so many appearances to the contrary, Vanderbilt had not made a close alliance with Gould. Their traffic interests still clashed on many points. Vanderbilt had fought a long and losing battle against Gould. He had neither invaded the enemy's territory nor paralleled the line of his opponent by new construction or the acquisition of existing railroads. At no time did he threaten to enter Wabash territory to exploit the immense bargaining power of his westbound traffic, as Gould exploited the power of his eastbound traffic. Vanderbilt, in short, appeared to have been worn out by Gould's aggressive tactics, and he was sorely tempted to accept the proffered olive branch. He finally succumbed to the alluring prospect of corporate peace and the prospect of a steady flow of eastbound traffic at Toledo.

After the consummation of the New York Central transaction, Vanderbilt was loquacious. He talked at length to newspaper reporters and his philosophy was well expressed in one of these interviews. "It was a choice," he said, "between continuing the competition for western connections and making its members my friends. I thought it wise to do the latter."[^13] Vanderbilt was again appeasing Gould, although Gould was not long to be appeased.

Vanderbilt was optimistic, and was certain he had made an agreement which would benefit his system. Here is what he said: "We protect the main line by making the interests of those who have tributaries to it identical with our own." He admitted that the New York Central was more important to the Wabash than the Wabash was to the New York Central. Nevertheless, he continued, "By bringing them in we prevent any cutting off of the tributaries; we stop any attack on the main line by uniting and pouring into the Central all their business."[^14] Gould must have given Vanderbilt abundant assurances of the flow of traffic that would soon overtax the Lake Shore's line from Toledo. Informed commercial judgment seemed to be equally optimistic over the favorable effects upon the city of New York. One New York commercial journal with a wide following was certain "that New York would be greatly benefited by a connection through the Central with the great Wabash Railroad system."[^15] Perhaps the situation can best be summed up by a remark filled with wisdom made by an observing stockbroker. A fellow broker had asked him why Vanderbilt had sold his large block of New York Central stock. His reply was suggestive. "Oh; I suppose he wanted peace."[^16]

In the traffic contract between the Wabash and the New York Central, completed early in January, 1880, both roads agreed to establish a new through line, to be operated under the joint management of three fast freight lines. The equipment was to be used solely between Boston, New York City, and the western termini of the Wabash.[^17]

Not many weeks passed before Gould made it clear to the railroad world, including Vanderbilt, that he had no intention of trading eastbound business exclusively with Vanderbilt. Early in March of 1880, the Wabash called a stockholders' meeting to approve a bond issue for the purpose of financing the building of a Chicago line. The Wabash, it was clear, would trade its eastbound business at Chicago as well as at Toledo. The Grand Trunk meanwhile had finished its new, although roundabout, line to Chicago.

Vanderbilt proposed to fight both the Grand Trunk and the Wabash. Accordingly he petitioned the court to enjoin the construction of depot facilities by the Chicago & Western Indiana—a new terminal company to serve both of those roads—and at the same time attacked the validity of a city ordinance which authorized the company to use the city streets. Both the Vanderbilt and the anti-Vanderbilt groups resorted to physical violence. Engines and rails were displaced, and a number of people had their heads broken by brickbats.[^18] Eventually, Vanderbilt accomplished little and succeeded only in delaying the completion of terminal facilities from April to August. When they were finished, the Wabash and another small road, the Chicago & Eastern Illinois, leased the properties of that terminal company and guaranteed the interest on its bonds. The Grand Trunk contract with the terminal company remained unchanged.

The Chicago terminal war was accompanied by the passenger war of 1880 to 1882, which introduced a new railroad technique that was to be followed on an ever-widening scale during the next decade. Railroad wars in the previous quarter of a century had been fights for business, with each participating road attempting to get more of the available traffic. Gould's Wabash line from St. Louis to Chicago, however, was circuitous, and there was little expectation that through a rate cut he could get any increase of business. If a rate war would cost him little, however, it would cost his competitors a great deal. Vanderbilt, on behalf of the Lake Shore, was not the only one who wanted to keep Gould out of Chicago. The Illinois Central and the Rock Island were in full agreement with Vanderbilt. The passenger fare war, however, was designed not so much to get more business for the Wabash, as it was to enforce a policy on a competitor. In the rate struggles of the eighties and the early nineties, many such wars occurred. Almost a decade after Gould began this policy, an association representing the railroad industry denounced such wars in no uncertain terms. "No common carrier," it wrote, "can be justified in engaging in a general rate war to punish an adversary or to redress a wrong."[^19]

Although by the fall of 1880 the Wabash had been in Chicago for six months, it could do little business until it had station and terminal facilities. Suddenly, without any previous negotiations, the Wabash struck, and cut passenger fares drastically. Gould, for the Wabash, lost the first round. The Alton—a Chicago line—controlled also a line from St. Louis to Kansas City, between which points the Wabash had the short route. The Alton, by cutting its Chicago-St. Louis-Kansas City rate, therefore, hurt the Wabash more than itself. Within a week, a conference in which Gould for the first time represented the Wabash apparently settled the war. The participating roads, which included the Missouri Pacific as well as the Wabash, agreed to pool their passenger and freight business through the existing Southwestern Association. Since this new grouping resembled the Iowa Pool which had for so many years stabilized the Chicago-Omaha business, railroad people were happy over the outcome. It was even believed that the Iowa Pool and the new association might consolidate.[^20] The Wabash, strange to say, even though represented by Gould, agreed to accept any division of business to be decided at an arbitration meeting to be held later. The business of the Wabash, in view of the rapid expansion of its system, was increasing. Since the arbitrators were to meet every six months and establish a new basis for division of the traffic, the Wabash expected to gain from the pool arrangement.

Despite the clear advantages of arbitration to the Wabash, the prospect of agreement with a Gould-controlled line was too good to be true, and Gould himself soon regretted his amiability. The terms of the settlement had been indefinite and the railroad officials present at the peace meeting disagreed on the meaning of its terms. In two weeks the war broke out anew and continued for more than a year and a half; it was not settled finally until June, 1882.

Gould's rate wars and Vanderbilt's battles were only part of the many activities in which he engaged in order to build up a new railroad grouping in eastern territory. Gould was convinced that to increase the competitive strength of the Wabash in this region, a large increase in through traffic was essential. He could trade better, he believed, and fight with greater expectation of success, if he could control and deliver more through traffic. It was not until some years later that he learned, as did so many other railroad men, that he had grossly overestimated the value of such traffic. He expanded the Wabash, seemingly in all directions, but actually in response to the hypothesis of the value of through business.

Thus, for example, Gould decided to carve out a new north-and-south route between the Southwest and the Middle West. To accomplish this he bought a number of short and financially weak lines, two of which were secured largely through the intermediary of Drexel, Morgan & Co. The bonds were eliminated in foreclosure, and the Wabash obtained control by issuing its own bonds secured by a mortgage on the acquired road. Although part of the securities during the preceding two years had been bought by Gould, most of them were purchased by the Wabash directly from the bankers. The Morgan firm in London, recommending the exchange of the securities for the bonds of the Wabash, declared that the latter was "a sound investment security."[^21] Some years later when the Wabash collapsed, criticisms were freely made that securities of these roads and many others were purchased by Gould and sold to the Wabash at inflated prices. There is little evidence to support this conclusion. The high prices paid for many of these short lines were the result of an illusion concerning the value of through traffic, an illusion which was shared with Gould by many other railroad men and railroad investors.[^22]

These new through routes were for the most part established in a slipshod fashion and with almost no examination of their traffic possibilities. The struggling bankrupt lines from which these routes were built appeared to find a haven of safety in the arms of the Wabash. Gould thought that consolidation would strengthen the weak roads and make them profitable as part of a unified system. Some railroad men were in agreement with this opinion although there were others with wide traffic experience who were convinced that consolidation was no Aladdin's lamp, and of itself could not revolutionize the earning power of insolvent roads.

Gould purchased a number of other lines which appeared to have little except nuisance value. One road, for example, had practically all eastbound business. It had no western connections, and its cars westbound moved "absolutely empty."[^23]

While building the Wabash system in the West, Gould was developing a new program in the East. In that region he entered upon a program of buying the stock of the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western[^24]—one of the anthracite carriers serving the northeastern Pennsylvania mines. Its lines extended west to Binghamton, New York, and east to the seaboard at Hoboken, New Jersey. The road was a competitor of the Pennsylvania and worked closely with the New York Central on traffic to Buffalo and the West. If it were extended to Buffalo, Vanderbilt's New York Central would be hard hit, although the Wabash would not necessarily be helped.

In the summer of 1880 Gould's hand in this new railroad strategy was revealed. On heavy trading volume the price of the Lackawanna stock rose rapidly, and in August came the announcement of the incorporation of a wholly owned subsidiary for the purpose of building a Buffalo extension. The incorporators of the new railroad included Gould, his two major associates on the Union Pacific, Dillon and (Frederick L.) Ames; his associate on the Wabash, Humphreys; General Eckert, president of the American Union; and Sloan, the aggressive president of the Lackawanna. Sloan had met Gould a decade earlier on the Erie battleground. Then they were business enemies, now they were allies. Their interests had clashed; now they harmonized. Business deals, like political deals, make strange bedfellows.

The Buffalo extension was a surprise to both railroad and financial groups but Gould's interest in the venture was an even greater one. With the completion of the Detroit extension early in 1881, the Wabash had a connection with the Great Western and could now send its traffic over that road to Buffalo. In anticipation of this lucrative business, the Great Western refused to merge with the Grand Trunk, since such action might lead the wily Gould to change his mind and transfer the Wabash business to another line, perhaps to Vanderbilt. A few weeks after the organization of the new company for the Buffalo extension, the Wabash, the Lackawanna, and the Great Western entered into a traffic alliance for a through route to the seaboard.

The Wabash accordingly was about to become a competitive line in eastern trunk-line territory, and its financial outlook appeared to be favorable. A leading eastern railroad journal reported Chicago opinion as believing that the various combinations in which the Wabash was then engaged would make it "one of the most important and formidable of any in the West."[^25] A well-informed middle-western railroad authority remarked emphatically that the Wabash system had been skillfully devised, and that while under good management and favoring circumstances the road would thrive, under adverse conditions it could "hardly suffer more than the older lines with which it [was] throwing itself into competition."[^26]

Despite his brilliant success in the handling of the Wabash, Gould's policy was unsound. His projects involved largely a diversion of traffic from existing lines. It is probable that had Gould made a co-operative arrangement with the existing Chicago roads, the traffic could have been equitably divided with profit to all. This, however, was not Gould's strong point. In these negotiations he could not resist the temptation to look upon railroad projects as an opportunity for beating his competitors. Under such circumstances a war of rates was logical. In the Wabash territory rates on Missouri River traffic were cut immediately after his acquisition of power in April of 1879, while on Chicago traffic the passenger war broke out in 1880. On the east, the projection of the new extension from Binghamton to Buffalo exerted an important effect in precipitating the rate wars which began in June of 1881. The trunk lines asserted they would make no concessions to the new Lackawanna until through competition it was demonstrated that it could force a division of the business.

These rate wars, furthermore, hit the Wabash at its weakest point. Under independent operation before Gould control, the road had already suffered from rate reductions. "About a cent and a quarter per ton mile," remarked an editorial analyst, "is the best medicine for this company. It would do more good than a thousand miles of new branches and connections with every city in the Northwest."[^27] In 1881, again at the height of its power, the Wabash, even at the expense of less traffic, needed higher rates. The full extent of the Wabash influence, its strength and weakness, cannot however be understood without a knowledge of its activities on the western end of the line. Here Gould also had the opportunity to display his ingenuity on a broad panorama. The corporate and personal opposition encountered in the West was more formidable than that displayed in the East. There he found no Vanderbilt prototype whom he could lure into making temporary agreements. Though the opposition was vigorous, the results were paradoxical. Despite the stubbornness of Gould's opponents, the losses on the western lines of the Wabash were smaller than those on the eastern. The moves made by Gould on the west nevertheless exerted a vital effect on the later evolution of American railroads.

---

## Notes for Chapter XI

[^1]: The views of Forbes are found in Burlington archives, Forbes to Perkins, May 6, 1879, and May 8, 1879.
[^2]: R. R. Gaz., Nov. 29, 1878, 579.
[^3]: Joy papers, Gould to Joy, May 1, 1879.
[^4]: Ibid., Francis Grey to Joy, June 2, 1879; Wager Swayne to Joy, May 17, 1879.
[^5]: Ibid., Humphreys to Hickson, July 24, 1879; Sept. 25, 1879; Field to Vanderbilt, July 24, 1879.
[^6]: Statement by the president of the Great Western at the general shareholders' meeting on proposals for the fusion of the net receipts of the Great Western and the Grand Trunk, cited in Herapath's Ry. Journal, Oct. 4, 1879, 1080-2.
[^7]: Public, Oct. 23, 1879, 262.
[^8]: New York Tribune, Oct. 28, 1879.
[^9]: New York Times, Nov. 22, 1879.
[^10]: Am. R. R. Journal, Jan. 16, 1880, 57.
[^11]: Phila. North American, Nov. 28, 1879.
[^12]: Am. R. R. Journal, Dec. 18, 1879, 1421.
[^13]: New York Tribune, Nov. 27, 1879.
[^14]: New York Times, Nov. 27, 1879.
[^15]: Bradstreet, Nov. 29, 1879, 4.
[^16]: New York Tribune, Nov. 27, 1879.
[^17]: Chicago Times, Dec. 2, 1879, states that the new freight line would provide 6,000 additional cars to be run exclusively over the New York Central and the Wabash; but Ry. World, Jan. 17, 1880, 57, states that the lines would not run exclusively over the Wabash. It appears that the 6,000 new cars would be used solely on the Wabash; and the existing equipment used over other lines as well. See New York Tribune, Jan. 14, 1880.
[^18]: This is the description of Sir H. Tyler, president, Grand Trunk, cited in R. R. Gaz., Nov. 12, 1880, 596.
[^19]: Decision of Executive Board of Interstate Commerce Railway Association in application of the Chicago & Alton, and the Chicago Burlington & Quincy for a reduction in lumber rates, cited in R. R. Gaz., June 7, 1889, 379.
[^20]: R. R. Gaz., Oct. 29, 1880, 573. A full account of the misunderstanding between Gould and other railroad officials as to the terms of the settlement is found in the minutes of an adjourned meeting of General Managers and General Passenger Agents, held on Nov. 8, 1880. This document is in the Burlington archives.
[^21]: Herapath's Ry. Journal, July 16, 1881, 865.
[^22]: Differences of opinion on the value of the acquisition of bankrupt roads by the Wabash was referred to by a traffic official of the Rock Island, in State of Missouri, Statements and Testimony of Railroad Managers, and others before Committee on Railroads and Internal Improvements of the Extra Session of the 34th General Assembly of Missouri, Jefferson City, 1887, 434.
[^23]: R. R. Gaz., Sept. 26, 1879, 515.
[^24]: Known hereafter as the Lackawanna.
[^25]: R. R. Gaz., Sept. 24, 1880, 512.
[^26]: Ry. Review, Sept. 25, 1880, 496.
[^27]: R. R. Gaz., Nov. 29, 1878, 579.