# Chapter XIII - Gould Moves into the Southwest

Previous chapters have examined Gould's railroad acquisitions in the trans-Missouri area and in the region between the Missouri and the Great Lakes at Chicago and Toledo. In this chapter his activities in the region south of the Missouri to the Gulf of Mexico and west of the Mississippi will be considered. In this broad territory his activities were as unexpected as his acquisitions revolving around the new Wabash through route from Toledo to Omaha. The surprise turned in the next few years, however, to a sensation, when it was discovered that Gould had actually built up a permanent railroad system, and had not bought the securities for trading and speculation. The Gould system of railroads was confined largely to the properties in the Southwest, and embraced southern Missouri, Louisiana west of the Mississippi River, and the states of Arkansas, Texas, and Oklahoma, to which was later added a large mileage in southern Kansas and a small mileage in eastern Colorado.

In the two decades preceding Gould's entry into this area, many railroads were built which with few exceptions were conceived as parts of through routes destined to connect the Gulf ports with St. Louis and the upper Mississippi River gateways. In almost all cases, however, the panic left the lines unfinished. Substantial parts of the existing mileage, moreover, could not be economically operated because of the inability either to forward local traffic to the market or because of inability to carry traffic over their lines from important points of interchange to competitive markets.

A survey of the railroad map in the late seventies discloses this unfinished stage of development. In New Orleans, with the aid of local subscriptions, the New Orleans Pacific was organized to build from New Orleans to Shreveport, but by the spring of 1879 little construction had been completed. Another local property, also a victim of the panic and a remnant of an ambitions transcontinental route, fostered by one of the ablest groups of railroad capitalists in the country, was the Texas & Pacific. With the aid of a land grant, the line was planned to extend from the Louisiana-Texas boundary to San Diego. After earlier failures, the project was undertaken by (T. A.) Scott, then vice president of the Pennsylvania, in the year 1872. With the help of a construction company in which, among others, Carnegie was interested, plans were made for financing its construction. The check given to these plans by the panic proved to be permanent. By 1879 the road extended only from Shreveport to Forth Worth, and from Texarkana west to Sherman.

At its northeastern terminus at Texarkana—at the intersection between the states of Texas and Arkansas—it connected with the St. Louis, Iron Mountain and Southern,[^1] a road built in the early sixties to serve an important iron-ore region in southeastern Missouri. Under the leadership of Thomas Allen, a prominent citizen of the state, it was extended to eastern Arkansas, and by 1873 constituted a direct link between Texas and St. Louis.

On the western end of the region, there were two major properties. One was the Kansas & Texas, extending from the upper Mississippi at Hannibal to northern Texas. The other property, spanning southern Missouri, was the Frisco whose predecessor company, the Atlantic & Pacific railroad, had been planned as a transcontinental route along the 35th parallel. Its ambitions were also frustrated by the collapse of 1873; construction languished; Scott and his group relinquished the direction of its management, and the railroad remained in its incompleted state.

These properties obtained connections to southern Texas through the International Great Northern,[^2] a consolidation of two corporations that had been promoted by a number of leading capitalists, including Taylor of the National City Bank who according to a New York daily was "a controlling spirit" in the road's management.[^3] The road was designed as a through route to the Rio Grande, connecting on the north with the Texas & Pacific, and through the latter with the Iron Mountain. On the south the financial crash left that line with a number of stub ends in Texas many miles short of its destination on the Rio Grande. So distant did this objective appear in 1879 that a correspondent of a metropolitan newspaper writing from Waco, Texas, stated that it would "be a long time before [the International] [would] be built to the Rio Grande."[^4] Yet in two years Gould succeeded not only in accomplishing that purpose but indeed far more.

The northern railroad link of this vast southwestern area was owned by the Missouri Pacific. Its line south of the Missouri secured the entrance to St. Louis from the west. Within one year after Gould secured that road, he acquired working control of a substantial proportion of all the lines and terminal facilities in the Southwest. The conquest was rapid; indeed in American railroad history there had probably been no other system built in such a short time by the use of such simple means with the aid of so few banks, bankers, or security issues.

The financial condition of nearly all of the southwestern roads was similar to that of the Wabash: they were heavily bonded, and their interest charges were high. Although the territory was rapidly growing, the future of the transportation industry was uncertain. Even in the midst of the inflationary markets in the early seventies, it was difficult to sell stock for cash, and the slaughter of financial values in the years following 1873 made it impossible to sell stocks with uncertain earning power. Of these roads the Iron Mountain and the International were in receivership. Although the Texas & Pacific succeeded in avoiding this desperate remedy, it was not in good financial condition.

In the summer of 1879 while Gould was negotiating traffic alliances for the Wabash and in executing those projects which allied him momentarily with Vanderbilt and while he was consummating his plans for the merger of the Kansas Pacific and the Union Pacific, he was also bargaining with (T. A.) Scott for resumption of the construction program of the Texas & Pacific. To build the road west from Fort Worth to El Paso either for connection there with the Southern Pacific or for its extension west to San Diego required considerable funds.

These funds could not yet be raised by the sale of bonds to simon-pure investors. The Chesapeake & Ohio late in the year 1879, for example, had unsuccessfully tried to sell an issue of $1,250,000. Money for construction was forthcoming largely from capitalists who were willing to take extra risks in return for extra gains. Through the use of a construction company, a railroad building program could be financed by bonds with stock as a bonus. The bond was the investment with a risk, and the stock the compensating prize. The necessity for this device was appreciated even by some of the shipping interests. Early in 1880, for example, a trade journal in the iron and steel industry—probably the greatest customer for railroad service—stated that the extra cost arising from the use of the construction company could "scarcely be said to be dishonest, as no intelligent investor [bought] the bonds of a railroad in ignorance of the fact that the stock issue [brought] no money into the treasury."[^5]

In 1879-80 the Texas & Pacific could raise no money and the road was apparently destined to remain a property of only local significance. Congress refused to extend aid. If it did not build west to El Paso and beyond, its traffic might be decimated by the aggressive expansion of Huntington. If he built north to a junction with the Atchison, or south to a junction with an east-and-west Texas road, the Texas & Pacific would be left with little through business. It was a bleak prospect.

Help suddenly arrived from a most unexpected quarter. That which Congress was unwilling to do, and (T. A.) Scott and his Philadelphia followers unable to do, Gould was both willing and able to do. Fresh from his conquest over Vanderbilt and the Union Pacific, his prestige and influence soaring not only because of these successes but also by his purchase of the Missouri Pacific, he was able to unite a number of wealthy capitalists in a proposal to raise the Texas & Pacific out of its doldrums. The syndicate organized to finance the building of the westward extension included Sage who had proved to be Gould's stanchest friend in the bleak days of the fall of 1878 and in the first few weeks of 1879. It included also George M. Pullman, the leading factor in the railroad sleeping-car business; (W. L.) Scott, long interested in railroad promotion and construction, a confidential adviser of Vanderbilt and a member of the New York Central stock syndicate of 1879; and C. F. Woerishoffer, a stockbroker and active trader in New York City, associated with Villard in the Kansas Pacific deals, and with a large speculative following. Other capitalists brought both cash and distinction. The syndicate and the construction company were organized in December, 1879, and the construction company's contract with the railroad for building the extension from Fort Worth to El Paso was signed in January, 1880.

Even though investors were not yet ready to buy bonds, speculators for more than six months had been reaping good profits from the speculative boom. The markets had been rising since the fall of 1878, but between July and late November, 1879, a boom swept over the speculative markets unequaled for more than six years both in scope and enthusiasm. The Texas & Pacific stock paid as dividends by the construction company to its shareholders could, therefore, be sold on a rising market.

Both shippers and stockholders were satisfied with the results of the work of the Texas & Pacific syndicate. The opening up of new territory through new construction was greeted with almost unrestrained enthusiasm. "Already," wrote one observer, "the effect is magical." New cities were springing up by the hundreds.[^6] Security holders were happy. The price of the Texas & Pacific stocks and bonds rose; the price of the stock of the construction company rose even more rapidly. Eventually the original shareholder of the construction company realized a profit of 700 per cent on his investment.[^7] A few months after the consummation of the contract, (T. A.) Scott, as president of the Texas & Pacific, informed the stockholders that the contract when completed would leave the road with $3,000,000 first mortgage bonds in its treasury and a surplus of about $600,000 in income and land-grant bonds. Since the company had no floating debt, "this reserve of securities [would] not only insure a well-constructed and fully equipped road, but [would] enable your company [Texas & Pacific] to maintain the very strong financial position which it [then enjoyed]."[^8] This was Scott's last message. The next annual message appeared over Gould's name.

The backers of the New Orleans Pacific, controlling the right of way from New Orleans to Shreveport now looked to Gould, the new Moses, to lead them out of the wilderness. The president of that property opened negotiations with Gould, to whom, in the words of an observer of the railroad industry writing from New Orleans, "so many languishing enterprises have recently looked, and not in vain."[^9] To get the road built, the owners would make almost any concession. Little more had been accomplished than the grading of one hundred miles. The property nevertheless had considerable value. It had a land grant, a feature that kept alive many an otherwise hopeless project. To the speculative mind, inflamed by the market profits already made and being made, a land grant attached to a railroad charter was more valuable than the prospective railroad itself. Gould, a master of speculative psychology, did not overlook this possibility. First, jointly with (T. A.) Scott, he bought the creditors' claims on the New Orleans Pacific at fifty cents on the dollar, payable in first mortgage bonds of a newly organized company.[^10]

More important, however, was his discovery of another land grant. Although (T. A.) Scott had been in control of the Texas & Pacific for some years and had taken an active interest in the affairs of the New Orleans Pacific, he had not discovered the importance of the grant. It was owned by a company, the New Orleans, Baton Rouge & Vicksburg, popularly known as the Backbone. It had been organized to build a road from New Orleans to a connection with the Texas & Pacific at Shreveport, but on the other side of the Mississippi River. Conditioned upon completing the road in five years, it had in 1871 received a large federal land grant. At the end of the period, the company having built nothing, the state legislature forfeited its charter. A federal court, however, declared the action unconstitutional. Gould wanted that land grant; even more, he wanted it transferred to the New Orleans Pacific. Congress was asked to repeal the land grant of the Backbone and to grant it to the New Orleans Pacific. A Louisiana senator introduced the bill but nothing came of it.

This did not discourage Gould; he probably expected it. To achieve his aim of placing the mythical Backbone road and its real land grant in the hands of the New Orleans Pacific, he resorted to private trading, an art in which he had few equals. (W. L.) Scott, a Vanderbilt ally, was permitted to participate in Gould's construction companies. Since Gould was soon to declare himself again an open foe of Vanderbilt, if he wanted to enlist (W. L.) Scott's aid, he had to act quickly. Gould, for the construction company, negotiated with (W. L.) Scott on behalf of the railroad company. Since (W. L.) Scott was reaping profits from his construction company commitments, negotiations were stimulated and an agreement reached. A majority of the stock of the Backbone had been pooled in the hands of (W. L.) Scott and an associate, the president of the road. By the end of 1880 the road had transferred its land grant to the New Orleans Pacific, and the latter in turn conveyed it to the controlling construction company.[^11]

Gould in executing his construction plans in the early eighties—and there were many of them—was prompt and aggressive; but in the building of the New Orleans extension, unaccountable delays were encountered. Despite the fact that the construction company was organized in February, the contract with the railroad for building was not made until late July, and the actual work did not begin until late fall. In fact, Gould was arranging to secure control of the New Orleans Pacific. The transaction by which he acquired control was an ingenious contrivance. The construction company—the American Railway Improvement Company—bought the road's securities and then reoffered them for sale to the stockholders of the Missouri Pacific, the Kansas & Texas, and the Texas & Pacific.[^12] The stockholders of Gould's southwestern lines thus became partners in the construction enterprise. The speculation was successful, and Gould's following had further reason to hail their chief. There was accordingly no opposition from dissatisfied stockholders to the merger of the road with the Texas & Pacific. (T. A.) Scott was enthusiastic over the New Orleans extension. Local business alone, he averred, would "more than provide for the fixed charges on the construction bonds of the company...."[^13]

To Gould the new line was the missing link in his southwestern system. To the Texas & Pacific it was the short line from New Orleans to St. Louis, and the Iron Mountain was dependent upon the Texas & Pacific for the movement of a large volume of long-haul traffic. On this business the Iron Mountain competed with the circuitous route of the Kansas & Texas, over which by combining several roads the traffic could reach Missouri and Illinois. To induce traffic to move over its line, the Kansas & Texas cut rates and gave rebates.[^14] Allen, the leading factor in the destinies of the Iron Mountain, had unsuccessfully urged Commodore Garrison when he was piloting the destinies of the Missouri Pacific, to buy control of the Kansas & Texas. While Garrison declined Allen's advice, Gould later accepted it. The reader has already been acquainted with the inimitable way in which he secured control.[^15] Gould's acquisition of the Kansas & Texas was a blow to Allen. By adjustment of rates and services the Gould group could now divert business from Allen's line to their own Kansas & Texas. Besides the Texas & Pacific, other roads contributed to the business of the Iron Mountain. The International owned a line to Houston. Another road just finished, the Texas & St. Louis, fed the Iron Mountain with traffic at its southwestern terminus, thus giving it a profitable long haul. When late in 1879 and early 1880, it became apparent that the Texas & Pacific would build west to El Paso, and that both the International and the Kansas & Texas would build south to the Rio Grande, the future of the Iron Mountain looked bright indeed. In its annual report for 1879 the management, reviewing these developments, concluded hopefully that they would bring the road "increased traffic."[^16]

By 1880 the Iron Mountain had solved its financial problems. To strengthen its position, Allen made a proposal to aid the Texas & Pacific to build its Fort Worth line. He was too late. (T. A.) Scott had already reached an agreement with Gould, and organization of the construction company for the building of the extension soon followed. This action threatened the friendly relations of the two roads. To counteract the effect of the loss of the Texas & Pacific traffic, the Iron Mountain tried to arrange a plan with the International, by which the latter would be extended to Laredo, on the Rio Grande.

While Allen had his eyes fixed on the south, Gould suddenly moved on the north. Again revealing his appreciation of strategic railroad values, he noted that the Iron Mountain did not reach its St. Louis connection over its own lines. Its southwestern line terminated at a small point in Missouri from which it reached the Illinois side by a ferry. From a point on the Illinois side to a point nine miles north to East St. Louis was a small terminal road known as the East St. Louis & Carondelet which was used as a connecting road between lines ending in or near St. Louis and the eastern lines. This terminal road fed the Wabash and other roads with traffic originating on the lines of the Missouri Pacific and of the Iron Mountain. Early in February the Wabash purchased control of the property. Allen was now caught in a vise. He had to work with Gould to secure an outlet for the traffic coming to and from St. Louis, or, at great expense, build a direct connection with the St. Louis Union Depot.

By early summer of the same year Gould had surrounded Allen's Iron Mountain, both on the north and west—on the north by the capture of the terminal line, and on the west by the capture of the Kansas & Texas. On the south he had already acquired a large block of Texas & Pacific, and through the construction company he was getting more. Allen still had available the river route from New Orleans and a large territory in Louisiana accessible to such transportation. There was also the friendly International, which formed in connection with the Iron Mountain, "nearly a bee line" from St. Louis to Austin.[^17] The International meanwhile was making its own building plans. Late in May, 1880, when the security markets were telling their tale of prosperity, and of even more optimistic anticipations, it announced its oft-renewed determination to build to the Rio Grande. It would, however, start prudently and build immediately only to San Antonio.[^18] Taylor was still a large stockholder. Henry Marquand, vice president of the Iron Mountain, and next to Allen its largest stockholder, had been one of the promoters of the road, and although he had retired from the management in 1873, still retained his stock ownership.

Despite this announcement, construction of the extension lagged. Completion of the line would have helped the Iron Mountain, potentially the most strategic link in Gould's southwestern system. Although there is no evidence to explain this unexpected delay, inferences can be drawn. Gould, Sloan, and Taylor were now closely associated in the affairs of the Lackawanna, having already reached an agreement on the building of the Buffalo extension. Perhaps Gould worked the Wabash charm on these men as he had on Vanderbilt of the New York Central and Francis Grey of the Great Western. If you work with me in the Southwest and work the International in my interests, Gould may well have said to Sloan and Taylor, the Wabash will give you part of its "vast" traffic at Buffalo, thus making the Lackawanna's proposed Buffalo extension profitable. This is only an inference, but the fact is that the International did not build its Rio Grande extension. Before many months Gould struck another blow at the Iron Mountain. In early autumn the New Orleans Pacific after long delays finally began its building program. The line from New Orleans to Shreveport cut "right across the southern end of the Iron Mountain, by which there was a strong possibility that still another slice of [its] cotton business would be taken away."[^19]

In December Gould sprung the trap by buying the controlling stock interest in the International. So unexpected was the event that the report was at first denied. Though the surprise was complete, the report was accurate.

Allen's Iron Mountain was now surrounded. Although in control of the short line from the Southwest to St. Louis, it had lost much traffic and was destined to lose more. Though its competitors were many, the majority wound up under the control of Gould. Allen, however, could still fight. He could ally himself with the Texas & St. Louis and build a Rio Grande extension. The latter line in fact was then endeavoring to raise money for that very purpose. He could alternately attach himself to the Gulf Colorado & Santa Fe, secure an outlet to Houston and then become a formidable competitor of Gould.

Allen, however, refused to fight. "I could have gone on an indefinite time," he declared, "but the prospect of having to fight singlehanded the combined money and influence of a combination such as that of Messrs. Gould, Sage, Dillon and their associates, was not very encouraging, especially as I could not feel the necessity for carrying on the struggle. I thought that by selling out to them I would be able to secure harmony."[^20] In the race for "harmony" by appeasement, he had thus outmatched even Vanderbilt. Yet Allen was more logical than Vanderbilt. Unlike Vanderbilt he expected nothing from Gould except a check for his stock. Allen had decided to enter the public service and in November had been elected to Congress. He had therefore neither the time nor the inclination to fight. Gould dealt generously with his surrounded business enemy, and in December purchased Allen's 40,000 shares for a trifle less than $2,000,000—a price above the market—and an additional 20,000 shares from Marquand, vice president. Gould also bought stock in the open market, bringing his total holdings to 70,000 shares,[^21] out of a total of approximately 227,000 shares outstanding.

By the end of 1880, through transactions negotiated largely by himself, Gould had secured a controlling influence in all the railroads terminating at St. Louis from the west, with the exception of the Alton and the Frisco. The latter, however, entered the city over the tracks of the Missouri Pacific. The stock interests of the Gould-acquired roads could be joined in a common effort only through the personal decision of Gould. Of one road he was president, while of another he was a member of the board; of one road he had little stock, while of another he had much. He owned a majority of the stock of the International, but he owned less than a majority of the stock of the Iron Mountain, while of the Texas & Pacific he owned only a minority. Of Missouri-Pacific stock he had a high percentage. In every road, however, with the single exception of the Texas & Pacific, he was the dominating influence.

It was logical that Gould should make the Missouri Pacific the parent of his corporate brood, since it was the only member of the family which he dominated by the ownership of an overwhelming percentage of the outstanding stock. The company, however, because of its lopsided financial structure, was ill-adapted to serve as a corporate vehicle for consolidation. Against more than $15,000,000 in bonds, it had only $800,000 in stock. The stock of such a company could scarcely command an active market and trading in the stock was bound to be slight. Neither could its value for collateral purposes be substantial. If the company was to be used as a medium for effecting the unification of all of Gould's southwestern lines, it was therefore imperative to widen the stock base; i.e., to issue more stock.

Gould lost little time in solving the problem. To create a legal basis for an enlarged stock base, he turned to the corporate subsidiaries of the Missouri Pacific. Most of these were part of the road when Gould bought the stock from Garrison. A number of others were either bought by Gould at low prices or were newly organized for construction purposes.[^22] These companies and the parent were merged, the transfer of titles being accomplished by an increase of the capital stock from $800,000 to more than $12,000,000. This transaction, while attracting but slight comment, had nevertheless a revolutionary effect on Gould's plans. With a large base the stock could be widely distributed, and the price per share brought down to a level at which public buying could be attracted. It was now a stock which could be actively traded and which could be accepted in a consolidation exchange.

Before he could take any further steps toward corporate union, however, it was necessary to remove the only remaining adverse interest—that of the Texas & Pacific. (T. A.) Scott was still president, the offices of the company were still located at Philadelphia—far removed from the center of Gould's operations. Since the time when Gould and Scott were first thrown together in the battle over the Fort Wayne in 1869, they had made many market and corporate trades. They had not, however, jointly managed a corporation, and their ideas of administration and operation clashed in the Texas & Pacific. It grew more and more evident in the early weeks of 1881 that one or the other would have to give way. The climax came in April, 1881. A meeting of the board of the Texas & Pacific was held in Philadelphia at the home of (T. A.) Scott, attended by Gould and his chief financial adviser, Sage; General Dodge, supervisor of the road's construction program; Major Bond, vice president of the Texas & Pacific and president-elect of the Philadelphia & Reading, and by Scott himself. The following day another meeting was held and decisive action taken. Scott resigned and sold to Gould his 40,000 shares of the Texas & Pacific stock and some bonds as well. A check was drawn to Scott's order, Scott delivered the securities and the transaction was completed. Gould sold the bonds and kept the stock.[^23] And in the twenty-four hours following, Gould rearranged the executive officers and assumed full control.

Gould was now the dominant, even if not the majority, stockholder in all these southwestern roads. He had, furthermore, a handsome profit. The stock market, after hesitating awhile early in 1880, again became buoyant in the fall, and in the spring of 1881 it was in the midst of a speculative boom. Gould could have sold out and realized heavy profits. On the other hand, he could unify the roads, build up a new system and control a large part of the business of the southwest. Although he dominated most all of the western approaches to St. Louis, he had plenty of competition in the southern and central parts of Texas. If he were to remain an important factor in the business, it was necessary that he unite his southwestern properties into a smooth working unit.

To accomplish this purpose, the co-operation of the other shareholders of each road must be secured.

Even before the acquisition of the Texas & Pacific securities from (T. A.) Scott, Gould had made inquiries to test the terms upon which stocks of the various properties could be exchanged. At no time did he consider the use of any complicated financial methods to effect the consolidation. There were no proposals for the issue of collateral trust bonds, for the pledging of traffic agreements, or the creation of special classes of voting stocks. The first proposal for the union of the Iron Mountain, the International, and the Texas & Pacific met with a chilly reception.

The Scott-Texas & Pacific transaction greatly improved the prospect for consolidation. It fired the imagination of traders and investors, and the southwestern stocks became the leaders in the market. The International in two days jumped 20 per cent on a few transactions, and the Texas & Pacific as well as the Iron Mountain stocks also advanced rapidly to record high prices. Gould immediately took advantage of this excitement. He first proposed that the Iron Mountain and the Texas & Pacific be exchanged share for share. A group of the latter's stockholders, particularly those from Philadelphia, demanded better terms and insisted upon an advantage of 5 per cent over the Iron Mountain, while the latter's officers argued for an allowance of about 1 per cent. Gould was equally interested in both roads, and he decided to accept any terms acceptable to these parties. In late April an agreement for the absorption of the Iron Mountain by the Texas & Pacific was apparently reached,[^24] but within a few days the agreement was broken. The Philadelphia group in the Texas & Pacific declared that the road had no competition, while the Iron Mountain had; also it had a valuable land grant, whereas the Iron Mountain had none. Negotiations accordingly collapsed.

This did not long deter Gould and he decided to ignore the Texas & Pacific. The sensational advance in the prices of Iron Mountain and Missouri Pacific stocks of which he had heavy holdings led him to work out a union of the two lines alone. Within less than a week an exchange offer was completed on the basis of three shares of Missouri Pacific for four shares of Iron Mountain. Although the Missouri Pacific thus secured a large majority of the stock of the other road, Gould's holdings in the Missouri Pacific were, to the extent of this exchange, diluted. Instead of owning between 80 and 85 per cent of the stock, he probably owned after the exchange less than 60 per cent.

Through ownership of the enlarged Missouri Pacific, Gould now controlled the direct route from St. Louis to Texarkana, where connection was made with the Texas & Pacific, which in turn connected with the New Orleans Pacific whose extension was soon to be completed to New Orleans. Gould thus controlled a through route from St. Louis to New Orleans. He had not, however, unified his lines farther to the west. The lease of the Kansas & Texas to the Missouri Pacific had given Gould access to the upper Mississippi River gateway from the Southwest. The International, however, had not yet been fitted into the consolidation scheme. Gould's handling of this problem was another tribute to his detailed knowledge of railroad strategy of the region—acquired in such short period. The International and the Kansas & Texas had been competitors for the building of the extension to the Rio Grande and their interests might again conflict. Gould united them and avoided any potential clashes by turning over the International stock to the Kansas & Texas. The exchange of two shares of the Kansas & Texas for one share of the International reflected the market price of the two stocks. Since Gould owned a large majority of the International's stock, he could by a few transactions so determine the market price as to facilitate the acceptance of his proposals. Consolidation of the two properties was therefore easily effected.

His mastery over the southwestern railroad system was, however, not as yet complete. While the International gave an outlet to Houston, system access to the neighboring port of Galveston was still denied. A small line, the Galveston Houston & Henderson, connected the other Houston railroads with Galveston. Like so many strategically located properties, this tiny road in the fall of 1880 had long been in financial difficulties. Two bankers, N. A. Cowdrey and P. F. James, had in 1871 purchased the property in foreclosure. In January, 1880, the property was surrendered to the mortgage trustees who assumed the responsibility to pay interest.[^25]

Gould watched these proceedings closely. Again, he and not his competitors recognized the possibilities. Taking advantage of a dispute between Cowdrey and James, Gould in conjunction with Sage bought Cowdrey's bonds. He then purchased additional bonds in the open market in amounts sufficient to acquire a majority. Once in this key position Gould and Sage carried out a transaction of a kind which made them so detested. They elected themselves trustees, foreclosed the mortgage and bought the property at the sale. Then they executed a squeeze: they made an offer to the minority bondholders requesting them to scale down their principal by 20 per cent and reduce their interest from 7 to 5 per cent. The offer was refused and another legal battle was on.[^26] Gould nevertheless retained control. He was free to switch the property to any corporate member of his southwestern railroad structure, and finally decided to turn over the stock of the reorganized road to the International. The road itself was leased to the International.

Even before these corporate realignments were formally completed Gould loomed up in a new character. For more than ten years he had been a railroad negotiator and consolidator. He had bought and sold railroad properties, and he had planned many consolidations. Though he had failed in some, he had succeeded in others. Beginning with the fall of 1880, however, he became a leading railroad builder. Into areas which had vainly appealed and begged for new railroad facilities he came as a rescuing angel. In areas in the Southwest where his influence was felt in the construction of new railroad lines, he was no longer a speculator; he was no longer a trader; he was no longer a negotiator. He was now a builder of new roads not only in the Southwest, but also in the Rocky Mountain country, the Middle West and the East.

Gould's southwestern system was created by acquisition, by construction of main lines to complete unfinished through routes and by the building of feeders to accommodate the increasing population and wealth of the territory served. The parent company was the Missouri Pacific which in the course of years acquired all of the stock of the Iron Mountain. Because of opposition from some of the Philadelphia stockholders, the Texas & Pacific never became a fully controlled subsidiary of any of the Gould lines.

By the end of 1881 Gould's southwestern system controlled more than 5,000 miles of line, and about 475 additional miles were in the process of construction.[^27] The system served the area north of the Southern Pacific in Texas, east to the Mississippi River, west to the Texas-New Mexico boundary, and south of the Missouri River from St. Louis to Kansas City. Though the roads were operated under one management, the accounts were separately kept and cleared through the parent company—the Missouri Pacific. To this system other lines were later added, and while some of the lines, notably the Kansas & Texas, were lost, the southwestern roads remained the major heritage of Gould's railroad holdings. To the surprise of most current observers, he did not dispose of his holdings in Missouri Pacific. He traded, he bought, and he sold, but he always kept control.

Despite the size of the system and the great possibilities in the boom years of 1880 and 1881, the eventual losses to outside investors exceeded the gains. The Texas & Pacific, when Gould acquired control, had no floating debt, and was earning and paying interest on underlying bonds. Within a few years the company passed through receivership and was reorganized. The Kansas & Texas, on whose bonds the Dutch bondholders had refused a 4 per cent guarantee by the Burlington, passed through receivership. The International was involved in a series of financial and legal struggles which impaired its value. The Missouri Pacific, however, enlarged by the acquisition of the Iron Mountain and by its ramifications throughout the South and West, remained intact during Gould's life. In 1881 at the peak of the boom, however, the southwestern roads appeared only to be a small part of a much larger system controlled directly or indirectly by Gould. He was one of the most important—indeed from some standpoints the most important—leader in the railroad industry, as well as the leader in the stock-trading community.

---

## Notes for Chapter XIII

[^1]: Known hereafter as the Iron Mountain.
[^2]: Known hereafter as the International.
[^3]: New York Tribune, May 24, 1882.
[^4]: Ibid., May 31, 1879.
[^5]: Iron Age, Jan. 1, 1880, 14.
[^6]: Stated by a correspondent of the Wall Street News, cited in Ry. World, June 26, 1880, 613.
[^7]: New York Times, Jan. 10, 1885.
[^8]: Annual report, Texas & Pacific, 1880, 25.
[^9]: Ry. Review, April 17, 1880, 184.
[^10]: Chron., April 24, 1880, 434; Ry. World, May 1, 1880, 421.
[^11]: A detailed account of Gould's negotiations with the Backbone is found in the New York Times, Jan. 10, 1885; and a comprehensive description of the transfer of the Backbone's land grant is found in Bradstreet, March 21, 1885, 180.
[^12]: Annual report, Texas & Pacific, 1880, 28-9.
[^13]: Ibid.
[^14]: Phila. North American, Dec. 16, 1880.
[^15]: See Chapter XII, pp. 234-7, for details.
[^16]: Annual report, Iron Mountain, 1879, cited in Ry. Review, April 10, 1880, 176.
[^17]: St. Louis Republican, cited in Ry. World, Nov. 25, 1876, 766.
[^18]: Ry. World, Feb. 14, 1880, 157.
[^19]: Statement of Allen in Ry. Review, Dec. 18, 1880, 664.
[^20]: Ibid.
[^21]: Chron., Dec. 18, 1880, 653.
[^22]:the best connected account of these lines is found in the Report of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation on the Missouri Pacific, 1935, 7, mimeographed.
[^23]: Phila. Press, April 13, 1881; Phila. North American, April 13, 1881. For an account of some of the personally interesting aspects of this purchase, see J. R. Perkins: Trails, Rails and War, 259.
[^24]: Ry. Review, April 29, 1881, 242.
[^25]: Galveston News, cited in R. R. Gaz., Jan. 9, 1880, 23-4; R. R. Gaz., July 16, 1880, 386; Sept. 24, 1880, 511.
[^26]: New York Times, June 30, 1882.
[^27]: Ry. World, Dec. 31, 1881, 1265.