# Chapter XV - Gould Acquires Manhattan Elevated

The Manhattan Elevated,[^016_1] even more than the Western Union Telegraph, occupied a position of monopoly. While the latter encountered considerable competition, the Manhattan had a complete grasp of the rapid-transit facilities in New York City. It was, furthermore, a monopoly conferred by law through a grant of the franchise contract. Nevertheless, despite its strategic competitive position, it was financially weak. Unlike the Western Union it had no record of dividend payments, and its property was covered with mortgages. From its very inception its solvency was questionable. At an early stage in its career, its leading stockholders had sold out their holdings and announced publicly that the company's position was desperate. Vanderbilt expressed his conservative instincts by refusing to make financial commitments in such a risky scheme. The earliest promoters in fact sank two million dollars in the first Manhattan company organized in 1875. The original proposal of building two rapid-transit systems was abandoned, whereupon two other companies were organized to do the job. These promoters also took a severe financial drubbing. The depression in the seventies bore heavily upon them and a decision of the Court of Appeals subjecting the rapid-transit properties to the burden of real-estate taxes constituted another blow which the original stockholders were unable to absorb.

Field, on the lookout for a property with speculative attraction, seized upon the stock of one of these lines—the New York Elevated[^016_2]—and succeeded in purchasing stock at almost nominal levels. The other property—the Metropolitan Elevated[^016_3]—was more conservatively financed and was supported by stronger financial groups, its stock being owned largely by a construction company—the New York Loan & Improvement Company.

For reasons which are not entirely clear, the New York, shortly after acquisition by Field in May of 1877, prospered more than its competitor, the Metropolitan. Within less than two years after he acquired control, both the gross and net showed excellent increases; the financial condition was improved, the standard of service was raised, and the price of the stock increased ninefold.[^016_4] The Metropolitan, although not as prosperous, was a vigorous competitor. A curious mistake made by the Rapid Transit Commissioners in 1875 drove these competitors into a hasty alliance. The Commissioners had authorized the New York to pass over part of a route already granted by charter to its competitor. They proposed that both roads build part of the structure in common, but such a solution from an operating standpoint would have been impracticable. Serious friction between the two companies had meanwhile developed. The regulatory authorities, after examining the problem, refused to devise a practical solution, and said in effect, "Gentlemen, go settle this among yourselves; it is a matter we cannot deal with."[^016_5] Though this legislative mandate was of no help, the companies in response to pressing business necessities did find a way out; they eliminated competition by adopting a lease contract. In this agreement the strong company did not lease the weak one; neither did the one secure a primacy over the other. It was indeed legally impossible, in view of the prohibition against the consolidation of parallel and competing lines, for one company to acquire the other.

Field had a major interest and was the dominant factor in the New York. Why Field should have permitted the prosperous New York to enter into an ill-starred corporate union upon the same terms granted to the less prosperous competitor cannot easily be deduced.

The old Manhattan Company was now converted into a holding company. Though it held no stock of the operating companies, it did hold a lease of their properties. In consideration of the lease, the holding company issued to each lessor company $6,400,000 of stock, and guaranteed the interest on their bonds as well as a 10 per cent annual dividend on their stock.

The new combination, from a standpoint of long-term values, may have been sound. Perhaps in the course of time the traffic would build up and the earnings advance to a point where the guaranteed dividends would be covered out of earnings. At the time of the lease neither property was finished; another $10,000,000 needed for further construction was to be provided by the two lessors and handed over to the lessee.

The inability of the new combination to increase its earnings in the early stages was overlooked by the speculative market. Speculators were attracted to the new venture which eliminated the conflicts between the two competitors. The price of Manhattan stock rose rapidly. The managers of the property, however, soon became aware of the difficulties of the new combination. Questions were raised over the legality of the leases, and legislative interference was anticipated.[^016_6] The optimistic anticipations of speculators were soon removed by the financial realities. By the turn of the year, it became evident that the Manhattan would be unable to meet its dividend guarantee. Major stockholders in the lessor roads who had received the Manhattan stock in exchange for the lease had by the spring of 1880 sold out.[^016_7] They had transferred the risk to the speculative public. Many had bought the stock because of suggestions made in the press both by Field and Tilden, yet both of these speculative leaders had sold their holdings. Tilden in fact made a wholesale clean-up of all his holdings not only in the Manhattan but also in the New York. According to current accounts which received widespread publicity both in this country and in England, Tilden in liquidating his holdings violated his pledged word to Field. This revelation did not apparently surprise English informed public opinion. One leading British railway journal observed some years later that even "such friendship as that of Damon and Pythias might not be proof against the temptations of the 'almighty dollar' in Wall Street."[^016_8]

As the weeks rolled on in 1880, and as the financial problems of the elevated system became more generally realized, the price of Manhattan stock continued to drop. The belief spread that the stock was worthless. Field, for example, was reported to have been short about 10,000 shares.[^016_9] The company's officers, one after the other, retired from their position of leadership and publicly voiced their pessimism. Early in 1881 even the representatives of the uninformed security holders, the financial press, were convinced that there was little value in the stock. "As to the Manhattan," wrote one observer, "it is difficult to see what value that [had] at all, for that [was] water pure and simple."[^016_10]

In this campaign of gloom, the promoters of the Manhattan, Field, Tilden and Garrison, advised their followers to sell at low prices, even though little more than a year before they had advised buying at high prices. The Manhattan was deficient in earnings, it was asserted, and it would be unable to pay its July 1 interest and dividend guarantees.

In the midst of this plague of bad news, Sage appeared in mid-April as a savior. He had a plan. He had bought a large block of Manhattan in the twenties, and with his plan he thought he could save both his investment and the Manhattan. He proposed that the company issue $2,000,000 of preferred stock to its stockholders, and that if the stockholders were unable or unwilling to buy, the stock would be bought by a syndicate which had faith in the value of the property. The syndicate also offered to make good the deficiencies of the lessee for a period of two years. The lessee would be provided with funds out of the proceeds realized from the sale of the preferred.[^016_11] The plan was sound in the sense that it was designed to bridge the gap between the construction stage and the time that the property would be completed and its earning power could respond to the influences of expanding demand and cost reduction.

Whatever chance for success the plan of Sage may have had, was rudely interrupted by a new development. The president of the Manhattan and some of his directors had called upon the mayor for relief from a rising tax burden and had submitted a statement revealing a loss of about $500,000, excluding some additional taxes recently proposed. If the company paid taxes in full, it would be unable to pay interest. There still remained in arrears taxes for the two previous years of $960,000. If the city insisted upon payment of taxes the company would go into bankruptcy. The net income, he said, was much less than in the previous year. The city, however, was obdurate and refused to accept the appeal of the company for a tax reduction.

This was the situation when Gould's daily organ—the New York World—began its determined attempt, persistently prosecuted for the next few months, to undermine both the legal and financial position of the company. The company was friendless. According to the president's statements, it was dropping into insolvency, and a default on July 1 was imminent. Influential quarters insisted that the stock was all water. Even the company's legal position was assailed; the company though incorporated to build elevated lines had not done so. It was now merely an agency for the leasing of the properties of two other corporations which had built the lines.

In the midst of these uncertainties, the company was suddenly attacked from an unexpected source. Those interested in the Metropolitan had arranged to raise the cash to enable the Manhattan to meet its July first guarantee. Before these plans could be perfected, before any move could be made to aid either the Manhattan or the Metropolitan, the attorney-general suddenly asked the court to vacate the Manhattan charter and to appoint a receiver. The company, he declared, had forfeited its franchise, had no legal existence and therefore had no power to lease the property. Furthermore, it was insolvent. The company, authorized by its charter to issue $2,000,000 stock, had issued $11,000,000 additional, and the shares issued to the lessors as a consideration for the lease of their properties, said the attorney-general, was "one of those gigantic swindles upon the community...."[^016_12]

One would expect that such an action would drive the stock to exceptionally low figures. It did no such thing. Even though the move was a surprise, the stock moved up first from 26 to 29, and then fell back to its opening figure. Nobody could "make head or tail of it..." declared a New York financial writer. "Being utterly worthless, it is being used as a stock-jobbing football by speculative gamblers."[^016_13]

To make the situation even more confusing, the attorney-general suddenly stopped proceedings in the courts of New York City, abandoned the charge of legal invalidity and presented a complaint alleging insolvency as the sole cause for receivership before a court in upper New York State presided over by Judge Westbrook. This lawsuit was accompanied by others initiated by seemingly independent bond- and stockholders of both the lessors and the lessee. The instigator of these suits was then not known. As in March of 1868 the leadership of the anti-Vanderbilt forces appeared to fall upon Drew, so the leadership in 1881 appeared to fall upon Field who, however, upon his return from abroad, denied any responsibility.[^016_14] That there was "some cunning hand pulling the wires against these companies"[^016_15] was generally believed. Weeks passed and litigation increased in scope and complexity before the hand of Gould was finally revealed.

Gould from time to time lent a helping hand to increase the market confusion. He and his two lieutenants, Sage and Dillon, bought large blocks of Manhattan and Metropolitan,[^016_16] but they were not held very long. Gould was not yet sure of his ground. His immediate aim was to place the company in receivership, and thus prevent the New York from reacquiring its valuable property. By the middle of June the leadership on both sides became clear. Field for the New York was "breathing out threatenings and slaughter against all enemies, his eye being evidently most steadily fixed on Mr. Gould."[^016_17] It was clear, also, that Gould was against the New York. Whether he was for the Metropolitan or the Manhattan was not so obvious. He apparently had decided to interest himself in both companies. If the Manhattan disappeared, he could acquire the Metropolitan and compete with Field's property. He could then by the reduction of fares or the creation of operating obstacles exert pressure on his competitor. He might even force a merger—on his own terms. To reproduce the line of thought of a New York press critic, he could make a drive against the Manhattan and when the stock was pressed down to a low price by threat of dissolution, "well-informed" people would push the price up, a compromise would be arranged, and the company would be set up on its feet.[^016_18] In fact, Gould played on both sides, and he acquired a heavy interest in both properties. "My theory was," he said a few months later, "that which ever side won I would have the same interest at stake."[^016_19]

He went ahead carefully with his plan, selecting first the proper judge. The new judge was not tied up with a political boss who accepted stock in the company for services duly rendered. He was a complaisant person, one who was impressed by personal business success. He was, furthermore, a judge whose credibility knew almost no bounds.

It is impossible to invade the inner workings of the relationship between the attorney-general and Gould's retinue of associates and employees. Why the attorney-general presented a complaint which was drawn by the lawyers for Connor, Gould's stockbroker, cannot be explained.[^016_20] The attorney-general neither profited from the Gould stocks nor was he a party to any of Gould's transactions. There was no doubt, however, that he followed Gould's wishes, or at least fulfilled his desires, first in presenting a complaint and secondly in placing it in the hands of a suitable judge. To make it more certain that the Manhattan would get no relief, and to assure default on July 1, thus precipitating the Manhattan into insolvency, Gould arranged a number of other legal side shows. A small bondholder of the two lessor lines asked the trustees of their outstanding bonds to request the court to enjoin the lessee from paying any dividends on the stocks of the lessor properties. The distribution of dividends "utterly destroys the lien of the bondholders... and is a gross and inexcusable waste of the mortgaged property," said his lawyer.[^016_21] The request was rejected. The bondholder on his own account then asked the court to enjoin the dividend payments. The request was granted. Regardless of plans made by the Metropolitan security holders to advance funds to the Manhattan to enable it to pay dividends and thus to keep it solvent, Gould made his point, and the company was judicially insolvent.

The fears of the past six weeks were now realities. The Manhattan was a helpless wreck, and the financial journalists were unanimous in their belief that the end had come. They were sure that the Manhattan's lease would be broken. The stock then would "be worth fully the ragman's price for the paper on which it is printed, but hardly more."[^016_22] Gould's organ, the New York World, speaking through the "Wall Street Gossip," column, stated flatly that the "Complete wiping out of the Manhattan company and its stock would be a great blessing to Wall Street."[^016_23]

It was generally agreed that the Manhattan was insolvent, and should be placed in receivership. Receivership, however, had a weakness: it left the way open to the recapture of the New York by Field. This was a consummation, which, at all costs, Gould must prevent. The New York was the profitable arm of the Manhattan system; without it the stocks of the other lessor and the lessee would be worth little. Gould therefore arranged the receivership to prevent this evil. A group of nominees from which a receiver would be appointed was presented to Judge Westbrook. All were Gould men, and from this list two were selected. One was John F. Dillon, the attorney for the Union Pacific, who had rendered such valuable service in interpreting the federal law for the benefit of the Western Union, and who was soon to perform some equally clever legal legerdemain for the Manhattan. The other was Hopkins, the operating vice president of the Wabash. Both were loyal followers of Gould; both were on his pay roll; both constantly saw Gould on the Manhattan and other business.

By this receivership, Gould further increased his bargaining position against Field who could not secure repossession of his New York until he traded with the receivers. Field remained in a threatening and fighting mood, but Gould knew his man. Field, like Vanderbilt, fought intermittently. He would blaze forth in a rising flame of anger, but the flame gradually died out and soon became a dead fag-end of ashes and dust.

In order to improve his position Gould deemed it wise, if not indeed essential, to secure a position of commanding influence in the policies of the Metropolitan. If he secured control of this property he might be able through his technique of threats of competitive construction, to bring Field to heel. Gould believed that in control of the Metropolitan he could induce Field to pool his New York with the Metropolitan. To get a controlling influence of the policies of the Metropolitan seemed on the face of things well-nigh impossible. Gould had only a nominal interest, perhaps one hundred shares of the stock. Though Sage had been a speculative leader in the stock, he, too, had relatively few shares. The controlling interest was held by Sylvester H. Kneeland, who had bought heavily at high prices. Kneeland was discouraged. The price of his stock had declined and he was uncertain of the future. He was also appalled that Field might seize control of the New York and operate it in competition with the Metropolitan. Sage, therefore, presented himself to Kneeland in the role of a rescuer. Gould, said Sage, could, if given a chance, "build up the company."[^016_24] These were small words but they were pregnant with possibilities. If the ticket for the Metropolitan board were made up as Gould wanted it, then, assured the bland Sage, "he thought they could handle Mr. Field."[^016_25]

Gould acted well the part of the bashful young lady. He was not interested in the property; in fact, he would not even allow his name to be used on the ticket. It was a beautiful case of self-effacement. The case was so convincing indeed that an independent judge three years later, upon the basis of all available evidence, concluded that Gould was not interested in the Metropolitan board and that he was only induced to join it by the other party under conditions laid down by himself.

Thus early in July the shy Gould and his ticket was elected by a vote of 45,000 shares out of 52,000. Gould and his associates had only a nominal interest in the stock. His associates owned nothing; Kneeland's shares qualified them as board members. It is strange how extensive grants of power are freely surrendered and freely extended. Gould made no agreements; he made no conditions that had any standing whatsoever in the courts. He had a reputation for being a dangerous man. He had succeeded in one ingenious trade after another in taking advantage of every opportunity afforded by a corporate or financial set-up. Despite this record he was entrusted with an extraordinary grant of power. No questions were asked and no assurances were given. Kneeland accepted Gould's terms, placed him and his group on the board and in return received nothing except the assurance made by Sage that he, Gould, would "build up the property."

Gould now had some influence in two of the three properties. Through the receivers, he could control the policies of the Manhattan; through his personally picked board of directors he could influence the policies of the Metropolitan. He had, however, no influence on the affairs of the New York, and Field on behalf of that company insisted that there were only two policies to follow. Either the lease agreement must be carried out and the guaranteed dividend paid, or the New York must repossess its property. In view of the inability of the lessee to carry out the former alternative, Field in mid-July moved to adopt the latter. The Manhattan now owed the New York close to half a million dollars for unpaid interest and dividends. While the New York had always earned the guaranteed dividend, the Metropolitan had earned barely enough to meet its interest.[^016_26] Field therefore asked the receivers for an order directing the return of the New York to its owners. This the judge refused to do and instead issued an order to show cause why the property should not be returned. The order was returnable the next day; though many weeks passed before the order was returned. Upon one pretext or another the date was suspended, giving the patient Gould his opportunity to do battle with the belligerent Field.

In this contest, Field was on strong ground, and certain of success. Gould, as usual, had a financial trick in his bag. Though it was not a new one, Field had long recognized its importance. In May, 1881, shortly after the attorney-general had taken legal action against the Manhattan, he had solicited an opinion from John F. Dillon on the potential claim of the lessee against the lessors for further consideration for its issued stock. The Manhattan stock had been exchanged for a lease of the properties of the New York and the Metropolitan. The original stockholders of the New York, including Field, who had received $6,500,000 of stock had sold out. Did not the Manhattan, therefore, have a claim against the New York for the stock which it had issued and for which it had received nothing? Early in August while Judge Westbrook, on one pretext or another, was postponing the hearing on the show-cause order for the return of the New York, the Manhattan shareholders announced that they would sue Field and other original shareholders on the ground that they were personally responsible for the par value of the stock which they had received. Since Field had fortified himself with John F. Dillon's opinion that he was not responsible,[^016_27] he had no fear, and therefore laughed at the threat. Alas! He did not know what John F. Dillon, egged on by Gould, could do to his own legal judgments. All that he needed was a delicate hint from Gould and forthwith he interpreted the facts to suit another point of view. Gould knew John F. Dillon well; better than did Field. And Gould, when he heard of Field's reactions, informed him that unless he approved a reasonable settlement, there would be "enough lawsuits to last him the rest of his life."[^016_28] A reasonable settlement, of course, was one in which Field surrendered part of the earnings of the New York to help the Metropolitan and the Manhattan.

The fight was now joined. Field would not resign the presidency, he said, until his fight for regaining possession of his property was finished.[^016_29] The hearings before Judge Westbrook on the order for the return of the property were again postponed. On September 30, the ninety days' grace under the lease contract expired, and on that date, the lessor was entitled to recover its property. At twelve o'clock noon, on the twenty-ninth, while Field was making preparations to take possession, another blow was suddenly struck, this time apparently on behalf of the Metropolitan. The Manhattan now proposed to sell receiver's certificates to raise money to pay the lessors. In that event the New York would not immediately repossess its property. The Manhattan, however, would be saved, and the Metropolitan protected from irretrievable loss. The stage setting was beautifully arranged. It was announced that persons interested in the Metropolitan would buy the receiver's certificates. The judge arranged a meeting in the Western Union Building in an office adjacent to Gould's private office. The order was granted and it appeared for a time that the money would be provided to pay dividend and interest arrears and thus hold the elevated system together. The receiver's certificates, the issue of which was approved by the credulous judge, turned out to be a financial absurdity. Instead of being secured by a lien on the properties of the two lessor companies, the certificates were secured only by a charge on the net earnings of the lessee. To make doubly certain that the certificates were valueless, it was provided further that they could not be sold below par. They were "not worth anything," said Field, "I wouldn't give a dollar for as many as a jackass could draw downhill."[^016_30] He was sure, he continued, that he would have his property the next day. He did not get his property the next day. The day was spent before the judge in presenting petitions. The petitions were uniformly pessimistic of the future of the Manhattan.

The proceeding was a farce and apparently accomplished nothing. As a matter of fact, as in other instances in Gould's career, it accomplished everything. Informed security holders were now again unanimous, as they had been in the early summer, in the belief that the position of the Manhattan was hopeless. The company would soon lose the New York. It could raise no money through the sale of receiver's certificates and therefore could not pay its accumulated unpaid obligations. If Field seized the property, the Manhattan would have no equity and its common stock would be valueless. The price of the stock continued to drop and Gould and Sage told Kneeland privately that the Manhattan was at the end of its rope.[^016_31] Although Kneeland and his group did not sell, many others did. When everything seemed blue, when the market was ready to plumb new and unknown depths, the decline suddenly stopped. What happened in December of 1880 to the price of Western Union happened in October, 1881, to the price of Manhattan. Gould played his hand skillfully. Every interested party, friend and foe, united publicly in declaring that the Manhattan had no future. Its disappearance was certain. The newspapers, the stockbrokers, the financial journals, and the responsible trade sources all chimed in. It was a symphony of fatalism. While everybody croaked and sold, Gould said nothing and bought. In the last week of September, he owned no shares of Manhattan. By the eighth of October he appeared as the owner of 20,000 shares, and also transferred 28,000 of his business associate, Connor. Gould therefore controlled 48,000 shares out of a total of 128,000 outstanding.[^016_32] One month later Gould's ticket was elected to the Manhattan board. Again there were the familiar names of Gould, Sage and Dillon, to which were now added the elevated specialists, Field and Garrison. In view of the formidable market problems still remaining before full control could be assured, Connor, the stockbroker expert, was also added.

While Gould now controlled the Manhattan he did not control the New York, the most profitable part of the system. Since business transactions of this kind are normally carried out in secret, the positions of Gould and Field during this period are difficult to trace. Here was a mixture of secrecy and public profession which seems hard to reconcile. A financial paper throws some light on the mystery by its reference to a report that Field aided Gould in exchange for a Gould tip to buy Western Union.[^016_33] Two days after the new Manhattan board was organized, Field was elected to the directorate of the Western Union. After the election he had a friendly interview with Gould, a fact known to newspaper reporters. Field and Gould were still at odds over the Manhattan—Field insisting that his property be returned to him, and Gould that precisely the contrary be done. Field's election to the Western Union board was therefore surprising, and "what were supposed to be two opposing forces in the elevated railroad system, were smoking the pipe of peace around the executive board of the telegraph company."[^016_34]

Although conciliation seemed to pervade the Manhattan atmosphere, the conciliation, it became clear, would be made on Gould's terms. Field would do the giving and Gould the receiving. In some undisclosed way, it appeared that the New York would not be operated as a separate property; rather that it would be included in the existing Manhattan system. Optimism rapidly supplanted pessimism. The price of Manhattan which in late September had dropped to below 18 now jumped rapidly, and Gould's 20,000 shares which had cost him $30 a share were at this time worth $54.

Strange to say, Field was adamant and not disposed to relinquish control. "I shall fight," he insisted on the thirteenth of October, in the midst of developments bright for the fortunes of the Manhattan, "until I regain possession of my property. I am in favor of peace, but sometimes it is necessary to conquer peace."[^016_35] Field was no doubt sincere in his determination to fight out the issue. He did not, however, know his man. He was not the shrewd judge of the strength and weaknesses of his associates and antagonists that was Gould. His mind could not conceive the range of Gould's mind, and it never dawned upon him that Gould could play his game with Judge Westbrook as he had with Judge Gilbert in the Erie days, and with Judge Donohue in the transfer of the Denver Pacific stock from Gould as trustee of a Kansas Pacific mortgage to Gould as the owner of the Kansas Pacific stock.

Gould retained his ability in the art of judicial interference. In the Manhattan negotiations with Field this form of business skill gave him such a vantage point as to make his position almost unassailable. The counsel for the receivers of the Manhattan was General Wager Swayne who did little legal business other than that for the companies controlled by Gould. While the Manhattan was in receivership he saw Gould once or twice weekly on railroad business. Swayne was also in constant touch with Judge Westbrook throughout the weeks of the Manhattan receivership, and consulted him in connection with the prolonged negotiations over the order directing the return to Field of his New York property. Early in September when Judge Westbrook was preparing to hold hearings on Field's motion for reacquisition, he wrote to Swayne suggesting arguments to be presented on behalf of the Manhattan. "Should not," wrote Judge Westbrook, "also the claim be made that the Manhattan Co. has a counter-claim to be sent in the shape of unpaid stock?"[^016_36] And some two weeks later, only a few days before the expiration date of the ninety-day grace period, the judge wrote blandly to Swayne that if the payments on arrears under the lease contract were made on October first, the last date possible, "it would have a most happy effect." He had already informed Hopkins, one of the Manhattan receivers, both by wire and by letter of the necessity of securing this result. "I am willing to go to the very verge of judicial discretion," he wrote to Swayne.[^016_37]

In these negotiations Gould through the receivers' counsel was duly informed of events to come before they were publicly announced. The judge informed both Swayne and John F. Dillon—the other Manhattan counsel—what he intended to do, and what decisions he intended to write. Neither Field for the New York nor the attorney-general for the state, had this way of knowing the mind of the judge. The innocent attorney-general complained, but did nothing. When upon one occasion, he said, the roads made an agreement among themselves as to what kind of order should be entered, they hurried off to the judge but gave no notice to the attorney-general, and after the judge granted the order, they raced back to the attorney-general for his approval. The judge, complained the attorney-general, "graciously" informed him that the order ought to be granted. Did the attorney-general object to the granting of the order? He did not. He seems to have had no iron in his soul and despite his temperamental bleatings made more than six months after the event, he complied with the wishes of the judge and said nothing to the people whom he represented, nor to the representatives of the security holders of the Manhattan.

With Gould thus safely established in the judicial citadel, Field had only a slight chance to regain his property without a prolonged contest. Moreover, he was not prepared to fight against the powerful forces represented by Gould. He, like Vanderbilt, felt more dangers than he saw, and he saw more dangers than existed. It was easy for Gould to use a goblin story to frighten Field, as he had Vanderbilt. Field's goblin at which he had laughed earlier in the summer was the threat to sue him personally for his proportionate part of the six and one-half million dollars of stock of the Manhattan given to him in 1879 in consideration of the lease of the New York.

It was on the twenty-first of October that the long-repeated Gould threat to make Field liable was finally converted into a finished weapon. This was the day that the judge after so many weeks of delay finally denied Field's request to restore his property. The judge's reasoning was almost as astonishing as his decision and conveyed a clear indication that Gould's mind had some part in its making. It was another counteroffensive of the kind which Gould had so extensively used in previous campaigns. The judge declared that the New York had been guilty of adopting those very measures which had been followed by Gould and his little army of subordinates and satellites. The New York, said the judge, having by its deeds encouraged the nonpayment of interest and dividends by the lessee—the Manhattan Company—ought to be estopped from setting up this very nonpayment as a ground for forfeiture of the lease. Further, the judge intimated that the lessee might have a claim against the lessors for the full payment of the $13,000,000 of stock. Some months before John F. Dillon had advised Field that such a claim was untenable. Now in his capacity as receiver of the Manhattan and legal adviser to Gould, he performed a neat somersault and asked for permission to sue for the recovery of $6,500,000 from each lessor. The application was promptly granted.[^016_38]

To Field, the decision of the judge refusing to return the New York "was a surprise and a disappointment."[^016_39] The probable claim of the Manhattan shareholders (now primarily Gould) had the intended effect. It made Field surrender to Gould. Field, without waiting to consider the possible alternative, rushed to his new and gracious friend, and proposed a settlement. Gould of course was happy to please. In twenty-four hours Field proposed, and Gould disposed.

There was no trouble about the Metropolitan. Even though Gould and his group owned relatively few shares, they still controlled the board. The consent of that company through the board was, therefore, easily obtained. Though the settlement called for payment in full of the interest on arrears of the bonds of both lessors, the quarterly dividends on the guaranteed stock for the six months ending October 1 were not to be paid. In a new lease the New York would get a guaranteed dividend of 6 per cent and the Metropolitan 4 per cent, payable only if earned by its own lines. The Manhattan stock would also get 4 per cent. Any surplus earnings would be divided equally between the three companies.

Although the Manhattan was still in receivership and, according to the attorney-general, insolvent, the stock market refused to accept the logic of these facts. In three weeks the price of the stock advanced more than 200 per cent. The market indeed told the truth. The attorney-general soon surrendered to Gould. "The Attorney-General has informed us," blandly stated Gould to a newspaper reporter, "that he would not stand in the way of our project—our settlement. The property of the Manhattan Company was given back to the company by the receivers with his declared consent."[^016_40] This was the public statement made by Gould; but Gould, through Judge Westbrook, had carefully arranged the setting and the attorney-general innocently enough played his part as planned. The termination of the receivership was quietly arranged before the judge (it took just three days), and the judge sent the order over to the attorney-general for his signature. So, complained the latter some months later, there was, therefore, "nothing left for me... except to submit to what seems to have been disposed of substantially in my absence."[^016_41] Gould, of course, did the disposing.

Although Field was a peacemaker, and willing to share with the Manhattan the profits of the New York, the security holders of the Metropolitan were not so ready to forgive and forget. They did not want to be blessed as peacemakers. Kneeland, unlike Field, did not propose to surrender. He was enough of a financial man of affairs to understand that under the new agreement the Metropolitan would probably get nothing. In charge of its policies, the Gould-controlled directorate could adjust revenues and expenses in such a way as to leave no profit to the shareholder.

Kneeland resorted to the courts and thus opened another chapter in the history of the prolonged litigation which characterized the progress of Gould's effort to acquire the mastery of the city's rapid-transit facilities. Kneeland sued to upset the agreement: it was a violation of the 1879 lease and represented an organic change in the corporate structure of the company—a change of such significance that it could be made only with the approval of the shareholders. Gould immediately took countermeasures. He divided the stocks of the lessor companies into two classes—assented and nonassented. The stockholders of each of the lessors would exchange their certificates for new stock with the reduced rate of payment. The stock was called "assented" stock. Gould then proposed to list the assented stock on the New York Stock Exchange; and to make only the assented stock good for delivery on that exchange. Furthermore both of the lessor companies would pay no dividends on the other class—on the stock which had not "assented." This was an ingenious but high-handed proposal which destroyed the market value of the nonassented stock. After considerable hesitation, the governing committee of the Stock Exchange refused to list the new certificates. Gould with the help of his two major allies, Sage and Dillon, and of his newly discovered ally, Field, replied with a counter-squeeze. He decided to negotiate with the Stock Exchange as he had with so many railroads. He would issue threats; if the Stock Exchange would not agree to his request, he would organize a competitor. He announced that he would build a new structure, establish a new trust company and a new bank, and would go into the business of managing a competitive stock exchange. The threat was not taken seriously. Gould, as usual, said little while Field, as usual, was choleric. He was furious with the Stock Exchange and he used violent words in denouncing its action in refusing to list the stamped certificates. "It was," he asserted in referring to its action, "the greatest outrage ever perpetrated...."[^016_42] This temperamental outburst must have made Field feel better. Gould, however, remained cautious and cagey, and it was not long before he recognized that he had gone too far and that he had better make an arrangement more agreeable to Kneeland. Accordingly the three puppet boards of directors approved a new plan providing for the organization of a new company. Kneeland resorted to court action to invalidate the proposal. The judge, however, decided that the Metropolitan board had acted in "good faith."[^016_43] The new agreement was therefore valid.

Kneeland, although defeated, fought on. The new chapter in the elevated litigation had indeed only begun. Kneeland thought that he could take a page out of Gould's book of tricks. If the Manhattan charter had been considered illegal by one attorney-general in May, 1881, Kneeland believed it might be considered illegal by another in January, 1882. He therefore requested the new attorney-general to enter suit for the dissolution of its charter. Gould's counsel who had worked so assiduously in May, 1881, to establish the illegality of the company's charter, worked with equal diligence in January, 1882, to establish its legality. Out trotted the innocent holder-widow and the orphan-vested rights argument. The Manhattan company, it was declared, had 486 stockholders, every one of whom had become such since May, 1879, when the original lease was consummated.[^016_44] Although it is not clear how many stockholders the Manhattan Elevated had in May of 1881, it is probable that there were more than 486. These stockholders, however, had followed the advice of Field and Tilden, and were therefore entitled to no organized vocal protection before the law. Most of the 486 stockholders eight months later had bought their securities, under the leadership of Gould and Sage, and they were properly represented.

The new shepherds turned out to be more successful than the old. Kneeland's request to the attorney-general to bring suit to annul the Manhattan charter was turned down. Kneeland, again defeated, decided to await the annual meeting of the Metropolitan's shareholders. At that time he could cast his ballots and the ballots entrusted to him by the majority of the company's shareholders in favor of the elimination of the existing Gould-controlled board. The meeting was scheduled for the first week in July. Since almost all of the Metropolitan's stockholders had refused to exchange their stock for the stock of the new company, they were receiving no return on their investment, but since they held a controlling interest, they were certain they could recapture control in July.

In acting on this hypothesis, they recognized their inability to appreciate the limitless resourcefulness of Gould. They awaited patiently a fateful June day, but Gould was awaiting a fateful July day. Early in June the Metropolitan board met and adopted a resolution changing the date of electing new directors to the date of the Manhattan election, which was the second Wednesday in November. The new Metropolitan board, therefore, could not be elected until that time. The Gould stroke came as a surprise. It was furthermore resolved that the Metropolitan shareholders could not vote until they were registered on the books and this they could not do unless they exchanged their old for new certificates.

Kneeland again refused to surrender and the fight was renewed before the attorney-general. Kneeland won the first round of the battle. After considering the matter for some weeks, the attorney-general agreed to bring action to remove Gould and his associates from the Metropolitan board.

There was little time to lose. The meeting of the Metropolitan board was scheduled for November 8, and in order to reinstate the Metropolitan shareholders in their position of power and responsibility, it was necessary to secure legal action before that time. The suit, however, was not begun until the fourth day of November.[^016_45] The temporary injunction was issued and the election proceeded in accordance with the wishes of the electorate. The true ownership was thus revealed. Of 65,000 shares outstanding, a little over 5,000 were cast for the Gould ticket. "We have lost the election," declared Sage. . . . "There will be more litigation or a compromise."[^016_46]

There was now the prospect of open competition between the two rapid-transit lines. Ordinary businessmen would probably have engaged in a competitive battle. Perhaps the standard of service might have rapidly increased; perhaps one of the contestants might have early introduced electric power to supplant steam power; perhaps there might even have been a break in passenger fares. Both Kneeland and Gould, however, were heavily involved financially in one or another of the companies, and both were engaged in a struggle to acquire a larger share of an existing earning power.

There was therefore no war of rates, but there was a war of negotiation and litigation. Gould asked Judge Donohue to issue an injunction to restrain the new Metropolitan board from issuing any certificates with a 10 per cent guarantee by the Manhattan. This was the original guarantee which the Manhattan had made on the stocks of both the lessor companies in May, 1879. The judge, as usual, was gracious to Gould and issued a preliminary injunction. Three weeks later he continued the injunction.[^016_47]

Meanwhile negotiations proceeded in an effort to reach an agreement. It was understood that the Metropolitan as an independent competitor would serve the financial interests of neither side. Field was elected to handle the discussions. Field, however, was not a good negotiator. He had none of the patience and tact with which Gould carried on his dealings, nor did he know when to delay and when not to delay; when to remain silent and when not to remain silent. Field's plans for settlement were repeatedly rejected by Kneeland, and he finally declared that he was disgusted and would bargain no more. For more than a year the group led by Gould and Kneeland were unable to accomplish any results and in fact were unable to compel the other to enter into negotiations.

The financial status of the Manhattan, according to the books of account as they were published under Gould's supervision, did not appear to be particularly good. The fixed charges were earned only by a fair margin. It appeared by the summer of 1882 that the company, after meeting all expenses including depreciation, was not far from insolvency. An acute critic questioned, after an elaborate analysis of the company's revenue and expenses, whether any sane person could claim that the Manhattan was worth anything.[^016_48] A heavy burden against the company arose from its accumulated unpaid taxes (an accumulation which was partly responsible for its insolvency in the summer of 1881). Gould, however, succeeded in inducing the state legislature to propose a compromise with the company. The bill was condemned by the Mayor and Comptroller of New York City, who pointed out that the bill incorporating the compromise would enable the company to cancel its obligations by paying about 50 per cent less than any other railroad. "The bill," declared the city officials flatly, "is legislative robbery. It deprives the city of half a million of money now due to it, puts a premium on defiance of the law, and compels every citizen to contribute toward the payment of the taxes of the elevated railroad companies for 1880 and 1881."[^016_49] A legislative compromise was nevertheless arranged and the accumulated burden of taxation upon the elevated properties was eased.

During this period of judicial uncertainty which lasted until April of 1884 both parties made no move. The fruitless effort of Field to reach a negotiated compromise was not followed by any important moves of Gould, and it was not until late in April of 1884 that the court of highest jurisdiction finally handed down its decision. For the first time in the history of Gould's career, the court condemned his policy of not subjecting corporate actions for stockholders' approval. By the purchase of proxies, by the sudden closing of transfer books, by secret actions unknown to creditors and stockholders, Gould had committed shareholders to important lines of policy without consulting them. Federal and state judges had repeatedly handed down decisions judicially denouncing certain phases of his policies, but at no time had they flatly declared an agreement illegal because the stockholders had not been asked to approve it. In this decision the court stated that the board had no power to nullify a lease without the approval of the shareholders, and that even though there was no fraud involved, the agreement was voidable because of the interlocking directorate between the three companies. Gould usually was careful with the help of able counsel to set up financial combinations which although objectionable to security holders were not tainted with fraud. This case was no exception. The court declared however that there was objection to the manner in which things were done; the actions complained of represented attempts "to use the form of law to coerce the stockholders of the lessor companies into ratifying the merger agreement."[^016_50]

The agreement by which the Manhattan leased the Metropolitan was pronounced invalid. The lease agreement of October, 1881, was judicially declared a radical change in the terms of the lease, and the complaining lessor company, the Metropolitan, was therefore entitled to a judgment relieving all the parties from the terms of that agreement.

Kneeland, after a two-and-a-half-year struggle, had won a judicial victory over the Gould-Sage-Field combination. A victory in the courts was not, however, a victory in business. Kneeland was soon to learn of the resourcefulness of his wily opponent. The decision was not to be made in the courts but in the stock market. Gould's first counterattack was a skillful bit of corporate financial jugglery. The Manhattan, still in control of the New York, was financially sound because the New York was sound. The Manhattan was entitled to the surplus earnings of the New York after the payment of the dividends on the latter's preferred. Gould now proposed that the Manhattan surrender the property of the New York, and the latter to surrender its claims against the Manhattan. In order to make this exchange attractive to the shareholders of the Manhattan, the New York agreed to give to that company's stockholders its own 6 per cent junior stock. After the distribution of a 6 per cent dividend on the New York stock by the stockholders of the Manhattan, the excess earnings would be divided pro rata among the stockholders of both companies. It was a truly ingenious device. The assets of the Manhattan which made the stock of that company so attractive to Kneeland and his associates was based upon the earning capacity of the New York whose property was no longer in the hands of the Manhattan. Although the Manhattan lost the earnings from the New York, the Manhattan stockholders did not lose those earnings. The Manhattan stockholders gained, and the Metropolitan stockholders lost.

The agreement between the Manhattan and the New York was made possible only through concessions made by Field, president and major stockholder of the New York, who had so indignantly opposed the previous moves of Gould. Since October of 1881, when the lease of 1879 was abrogated and the new merger agreement approved, he had reversed himself and co-operated with Gould. Despite the superior earnings of the New York over the Metropolitan, he had made repeated concessions on behalf of the stockholders of the latter.

In trying to force Kneeland to a decision, Gould resorted to other steps. He recognized that his arch-opponent was engaged in heavy speculative activities, and he therefore endeavored to force his hand by depressing the price of those securities in which he was interested, particularly the stock of the Metropolitan. The stock was therefore raided, and according to one authoritative source, every Gould broker early in 1884, after the adverse decision in the elevated railway case, was advised to sell short in order to make a profit in thirty days.[^016_51]

Gould meanwhile opened negotiations with Kneeland. He was still anxious to maintain a monopoly of the city's rapid-transit facilities. Gould at this time was in a critical financial position and his whole fortune was at stake in the panic markets of April and May of 1884. In these anxious days when every day, indeed almost every hour, depressed the value of his holdings and impaired the margin of his collateral loans, he was unable personally to give the necessary time to negotiate with Kneeland. The Manhattan board had appointed Field and himself to reach an agreement with Kneeland, but Gould authorized Field to act for him. Field proposed that the Metropolitan could have its lines returned, or have them leased back to the Manhattan. If Kneeland favored a lease, the Manhattan would pay the earnings of the Metropolitan to the stockholders of that company up to 8 per cent on the latter's stock, with the balance to go to the Manhattan.[^016_52]

For the next six weeks nothing was accomplished, and it appeared that further court action would be necessary in order to stabilize the relationships between the two roads. By the end of June, however, a final settlement was surprisingly reached. It was Gould who created the conditions essential to a final settlement. The sharp May break had embarrassed Kneeland and many of his followers, and they were therefore forced to sell part of their Metropolitan holdings.

A number of new personalities came into the Metropolitan picture. One was a stockbroker, William K. Souter, who had correctly interpreted the downward swing in the security markets which developed in the summer of 1881. He had long been bearish on Missouri Pacific, and had openly expressed his opinion for many months prior to the break in May, 1884, that the Gould stocks were too high. Another personality was H. O. Armour, brother of the Chicago meat packer, and a man who had established himself in the New York financial community.

These two men, together with an active trader who frequently represented Gould in stock transactions, John D. Clayback, were appointed a committee of the Metropolitan board to reach an understanding with the other two companies for a union of interests. Again Field on behalf of the New York made the necessary concessions. In this last and successful proposal, a single class of stock was created. Of a total issue of twenty-six millions of the new Manhattan stock, each stockholder of the old Manhattan received approximately 85 per cent of his holdings in new stock; of the Metropolitan 110 per cent, and of the New York 120 per cent. The following table shows the distribution:

**Distribution of Stock of the Manhattan Elevated Among the Shareholders of the Three Companies**

| Name of Company       | Old Capitalization | New Capitalization |
|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Manhattan Elevated    | $13,000,000        | $11,000,000        |
| Metropolitan Elevated | 6,500,000          | 7,150,000          |
| New York Elevated     | 6,500,000          | 7,800,000          |

Though the earnings of the New York substantially exceeded those of the Metropolitan, it received only a slight preference in the distribution of the new stock. The reasons prompting Field to make this concession are not clear. Field himself, when asked to express an opinion about the plan, remarked, "I am the victim, led to the slaughter, as usual."[^016_53]

The directors of the three companies ratified the proposal and, except for the approval of the shareholders, which was soon forthcoming, the three-year contest was at an end. Gould had succeeded through a series of court actions in acquiring control of a holding company which had been condemned as a financial derelict. It was overcapitalized. It could neither pay its taxes nor its fixed charges. The owners of the prosperous lessor company insisted that its properties be returned. The holding company was placed in receivership and there seemed to be no hope for it. The price of the stock sank to record low levels. Gould at that very time, however, bought it in wholesale quantities. Threatening judicial action, he enlisted the support of his former antagonist who controlled the most profitable part of the elevated system to aid him in acquiring a monopoly of the city's rapid-transit system. For another two and a half years his financial mastery was challenged in the courts. Although he lost the court battle, he won the financial battle. At the very moment when he was deeply involved, when his solvency was questioned, and when he appeared to be on the brink of financial disaster, he succeeded in eliminating all opposition.

He was now master of the rapid-transit lines of New York City. It was only necessary for him to comply with the forms of the law, and this he was always able to do. It was necessary that he respect the declarations of the court made in 1884 invalidating the 1881 lease agreements. The court had condemned the interlocking directorates and it was therefore essential to eliminate this condition. Before the agreement was submitted to the stockholders for approval accordingly the board of the New York resigned. The new board consisted of confidential representatives of the old board. Of the thirteen members of the new board, six were made stockholders less than three weeks before they became directors. To them was transferred exactly two hundred shares in all, varying from ten to fifty shares each. On August 1, 1884, the New York stockholders' meeting was held. Within fifteen minutes the polls were opened, the election held, and the polls closed. Within a few minutes after this, the new noninterlocking board held a meeting, elected officers and ratified the agreement. Two weeks after the new "independent" board had made necessary ratifications, it resigned. The new board represented the interests of the Manhattan.[^016_54]

Gould's position was now financially and judicially unassailable. His patience and resourcefulness had proved adequate to solve a complex task. He had employed methods condemned in the public press and in financial circles, and his use of the forms of the law to carry out his policy had involved a judge and an attorney-general. Their actions were exhaustively reviewed by a legislative committee. No collusion and fraud were found, but only incompetence and credulousness. Gould had displayed in these negotiations a mastery of financial and trading technique and a knowledge of relations between the ill-formed corporation law of the day and corporate finance which have had few parallels in American financial life. In the control of the policies of the Manhattan, he shared his power only with Field who was the only large stockholder whose views he had to entertain seriously. Field however was no match for Gould in the financial and trading world. Field after the final settlement in the summer of 1884 waxed enthusiastic over the Manhattan's future, switching from indigo pessimism to rainbow enthusiasm. While Gould was liquidating his speculative commitments in the 1884 and 1885 markets, Field was becoming actively engaged in the speculative commodity and security markets. He continued to increase his holdings in Manhattan, and bought heavily on margin account. In the fall of 1886, after the stock had risen from about $40 to $175 a share, he boasted openly that the Manhattan's franchise alone was worth $50,000,000 and that this, apart from any other property of the company, was worth about $200 a share.[^016_55] He also became an active speculator in the commodity markets and it was the collapse of these markets in the spring of 1887 that led to his downfall.

Field's financial position in the spring of 1887 was made even more critical by the speculative activities of his elder son, Edward M. Field, through whose brokerage firm the elder Field tried to corner the market in the Manhattan stock. Field apparently had some desire to emulate the speculative career of Gould. Gould having retired from speculative activities in December of 1885, Field, it seems, had ambitions to succeed him. He did not, however, have Gould's ingenuity and resourcefulness. When Gould was financially cornered he found ways of extricating himself; usually acting decisively before a financial crisis all but overwhelmed him. He left himself in a vulnerable position in the summer of 1884, it is true, but his resourcefulness combined with the stupidity of his trading opponents enabled him by a narrow margin to escape disaster.

Field had none of this ability. The break of the wheat corner in the spring of 1887 almost ruined him. Although his losses cannot be ascertained, it was certain that he stood in need of cash to settle his obligations. He had at the same time approximately 75,000 shares of Manhattan. Had he been able to liquidate at the current price of $175 a share his problem would have been solved. He was no more able to do this, however, than was Gould in the winter of 1878-79 with his Union Pacific. While Gould found a market for most of his Union Pacific, Field did not find a market for his Manhattan.

What occurred between Field and Gould will never be known. Field apparently approached Gould for financial help. Gould, not being in the speculative markets and having no stocks on margin, was reported to have had about $6,000,000 in the bank.[^016_56] June 24, 1887, was a tragic day for Field. That day's market fluctuations were among the most remarkable in stock-market history. Commercial conditions were improving, stimulated by a large crop and an extensive foreign demand. Suddenly and with no warning the stock market on that day broke into a wild retreat. In a matter of minutes the price of Manhattan in the morning dropped 25 per cent, Missouri Pacific 12 per cent, and Western Union almost 10 per cent. Money rates suddenly rose to 25 per cent. In the afternoon the market reversed itself. What appeared to be a panic for those who held stocks turned out to be a panic for those who sold stocks.

One is tempted to conclude, as have so many commentators in secondary sources in after years, that Gould led Field into a speculative trap and then cornered and smashed him. Perhaps that may be the fact. On the basis of evidence available, however, that conclusion cannot be substantiated. A bitter and most consistent daily newspaper critic of Gould maintained precisely the opposite. The writer stated that Gould only "pricked the bubble"; and he pricked it in such a way that a crash which would have ruined one or more financial institutions was averted.[^016_57] Field personally denied in a statement to a newspaper reporter the accuracy of all the stories that necessity had forced him to sell.[^016_58]

Whatever the truth, whether Gould planned Field's debacle, or whether he was a victim of Field's financial blunder—it is the judgment of the writer that the latter hypothesis represents more nearly the truth, it remains true nevertheless that Gould now controlled the Manhattan. Before the end of June, Field sold his remaining 25,000 shares of Manhattan to Gould; and in possession of this large block of Manhattan stock Gould feared no rival.

Gould had become the undisputed master of an enterprise which had a monopoly of the rapid-transit facilities in the largest city of the country, and he never surrendered its control. Its earning power increased as the demand for transit services expanded. Its financial position was strengthened; its credit was enhanced; strong bankers of the day bid for the opportunity to purchase its securities and conservative investors bid for the opportunity to invest in its bonds. The stock was placed on a dividend basis, and the property proved to be, together with the Western Union and Missouri Pacific, the basis of Gould's business empire in his lifetime and one of the prime pillars of his estate after his death.

---

## Notes for Chapter XV

[^016_1]: Known hereafter as the Manhattan.
[^016_2]: Known hereafter as the New York.
[^016_3]: Known hereafter as the Metropolitan.
[^016_4]: *Chron.*, Jan. 18, 1879.
[^016_5]: State of New York, *Railroad Investigation*, 1879, Vol. V, 134-5.
[^016_6]: *New York Tribune*, Feb. 5, 1880.
[^016_7]: Field, in *ibid.*, March 25, 1880, said he had none of the Manhattan stock. *Ibid.*, of April 3, 1880, said he formerly owned 13,000 shares.
[^016_8]: *London Railway News*, Sept. 6, 1884, 391.
[^016_9]: *Wall Street News*, Oct. 9, 1880.
[^016_10]: *Bradstreet*, April 16, 1881, 232.
[^016_11]: *New York Times*, April 16, 1881.
[^016_12]: *New York Tribune*, May 19, 1881.
[^016_13]: *New York Herald*, May 19, 1881.
[^016_14]: *Bradstreet*, May 21, 1881, 312.
[^016_15]: *Ibid.*
[^016_16]: *Ibid.*, June 18, 1881, 376.
[^016_17]: *Ibid.*, June 25, 1881, 392.
[^016_18]: *New York Herald*, July 9, 1881.
[^016_19]: *New York Tribune*, May 7, 1882.
[^016_20]: This statement was made by the *New York Times*, Jan. 21, 1882.
[^016_21]: *Ibid.*, May 19, 1881.
[^016_22]: *Phila. North American*, July 9, 1881.
[^016_23]: *New York World*, July 6, 1881.
[^016_24]: *New York Tribune*, Dec. 4, 1883.
[^016_25]: *Ibid.*
[^016_26]: *New York Times*, July 26, 1881.
[^016_27]: *Ibid.*, Dec. 30, 1881.
[^016_28]: *New York Tribune*, Aug. 13, 1881.
[^016_29]: *Chron.*, Sept. 10, 1881, 282.
[^016_30]: *New York Tribune*, Sept. 29, 1881.
[^016_31]: *Ibid.*, May 6, 1882.
[^016_32]: *New York Times*, Oct. 9, 1881.
[^016_33]: *Wall Street News*, Oct. 22, 1881.
[^016_34]: *New York Tribune*, Oct. 14, 1881.
[^016_35]: *Ibid.*, Oct. 14, 1881.
[^016_36]: *Ibid.*, May 7, 1882.
[^016_37]: *Ibid.*
[^016_38]: *Ibid.*, Oct. 22, 1881.
[^016_39]: This was the language used by Field before the legislative investigating committee inquiring into the actions of Attorney-General Ward, and Judge Westbrook. See *ibid.*, May 9, 1882.
[^016_40]: *New York Times*, Oct. 28, 1881.
[^016_41]: *New York Tribune*, May 7, 1882.
[^016_42]: *Ibid.*, Nov. 23, 1881.
[^016_43]: *Chron.*, Dec. 24, 1881, 717.
[^016_44]: *Ibid.*, Jan. 21, 1882, 86.
[^016_45]: The complaint before the court is an interesting document and is found in full in *New York Herald*, Nov. 5, 1882.
[^016_46]: *Ibid.*, Nov. 9, 1882.
[^016_47]: A note on the order of Judge Donohue continuing the injunction is found in *Chron.*, Dec. 9, 1882, 658.
[^016_48]: *New York Times*, July 23, 1882.
[^016_49]: *New York Tribune*, June 1, 1882.
[^016_50]: *Ibid.*, April 16, 1884.
[^016_51]: *Bradstreet*, May 10, 1884, 296.
[^016_52]: This is the account of the negotiations between Field and Kneeland, as reported by Field in a statement to a newspaperman. *New York Tribune*, May 21, 1884.
[^016_53]: *New York Tribune*, June 6, 1884.
[^016_54]: This account of Gould's compliance with the forms of law is based upon the *New York World*, May 31, 1885.
[^016_55]: *New York Times*, Oct. 24, 1886.
[^016_56]: This is the estimate of *Phila. Press*, Sept. 1, 1887.
[^016_57]: *New York Times*, June 17, 1892.
[^016_58]: *New York Tribune*, June 29, 1887. In addition to the current press reports for an account of this incident, see also "Recent Movements of the Stock Market," by Cuthbert Mills, in *North American Review*, Vol. 146, Jan. 1888, 51.