# Chapter XVI - Gould Creates Empire—East

In 1881 Gould reached the height of his business career. He dominated the policies of corporations which controlled more railroad mileage than any other single person or group of persons. By the sale of a block of Union Pacific in February of 1879 he had revolutionized his position. At one stroke he paid his heavy trading losses and acquired a substantial cash balance. How he used these funds in 1879 to acquire the Wabash and the Kansas Pacific and to reacquire dominant control of the Union Pacific has already been described. In the following year at small cost he secured control of the southwestern railroads, and in 1881 he utilized his railroad control to conquer the Western Union. Later in the same year, he climaxed this brilliant three-year period with his mastery of the Manhattan Elevated.

Early in 1879 the country was in the last stages of a prolonged depression. Even though business was moving forward, the speculative and investment public was not yet ready to buy securities. Gould, however, was and his initial purchases at the low prices of the spring of 1879 laid the basis for his rapid rise to power. The railroad system under his influence was truly awe-inspiring. In the Far West in 1881 he was the policy-maker (although at that time he held little of the stock) of the Union Pacific—the country's premier transcontinental carrier. Together with his associates he held also the controlling influence in the stock of the leading water competitor of the overland railroads—the Pacific Mail. At its eastern terminus on the southern flank, the enlarged Union Pacific connected at Kansas City with two other Gould-controlled lines to St. Louis, the Missouri Pacific and the Wabash. On the face of things he was in a position to divert the Union Pacific's eastbound traffic to these two roads. His southwestern system furthermore controlled almost all the through routes from the Rio Grande to St. Louis.

In each acquisition Gould secured new allies who believed in him and looked to him for financial help. In every case they secured some help—initially. He was aggressive here, he compromised there. Whether he fought or compromised he exerted a permanent influence on the American railroad structure. He built new lines, initiated and stimulated forces leading to the building of additional lines by other roads, established through routes, and promoted alliances some of which have lasted until the present day. Out of his incessant activities and the development of complex adverse interests, there grew consolidations, contracts and corporate re-groupings that changed the face of American railroad and business life.

The railroad system which Gould built up in 1881 was unique. Nothing like it had ever existed before and nothing like it has ever appeared since. This was not a one-man domination such as in the late sixties and early seventies Cornelius Vanderbilt had erected. Vanderbilt took an active managerial interest in these properties and assumed responsibility for their operation. Gould from 1874 to 1879, it is true, followed a like policy with regard to the Union Pacific. He had, however, an urge for expansion and a love for securities operations which could not be satisfied by his control of a given corporation, no matter how complete that control was. If he discovered that negotiations with competitors could not be consummated, if he could not secure business or corporate advantages by direct negotiation, he almost instinctively thought of the stock market as an aid.

By 1879, however, he recognized that the exclusive control over a given property handicapped his trading operations. He could not use his capital represented by the stock to facilitate his market moves and to settle his trading accounts, and he therefore sought for close allies. These allies were carefully selected for definite purposes. The two most important and those who remained with him until the end were Sage and Dillon. Sage was an experienced veteran market operator. The conversion of the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph speculation from a prospective loss into a handsome profit made Sage a hero worshiper of Gould. From that day on his loyalty to Gould was never disturbed. Dillon was a railroad builder, and served as president of the Union Pacific during the Gould regime from 1874 to 1884.

This combination of Gould, Sage, and Dillon, occasionally designated as the Wall Street trinity, was a mark of Gould triumph in his years of expansion. Sage was the market trader, Dillon the corporate manager, and Gould the policy-maker. If corporate acquisition was preceded by a stock-market campaign involving the intricacies of corporate relationship and of stock-market technique, Sage's work was essential. His was the responsibility of examining the technical position of a stock, and of its distribution among traders and investors, of determining the floating supply, and of discovering the brokers. If the leading stockholders in an enterprise sought after by Gould were members of the stock-trading fraternity, Sage aided in the negotiation. So it was that Sage played the leading role in delivering the Metropolitan directorate to Gould, even though the latter owned none of the shares.

In addition to Sage and Dillon, Gould added to the board of each new corporation the names of others who served some temporary, although important purpose, and they remained just so long as they served that purpose. When disagreement developed they were dropped. Sometimes the same person appeared in a number of Gould enterprises because in each he could accomplish that which was needed. Field and Joy from time to time made many valuable contributions to Gould's career. Other important characters were added from time to time. There was Connor, the loyal stockbroker who stood unflinchingly behind him in the dark days in the early summer of 1884. Connor greatly admired Gould, and even after their business friendship clouded, his personal loyalty never wavered. An even more brilliant trader associated with Gould for a while was Woerishoffer, a Gould opponent in the Kansas Pacific reorganization. Thereafter Gould permitted Woerishoffer's brokerage house to serve as a fiscal agent for a number of Gould's construction companies. Woerishoffer also took an active interest in the sale of the Denver's securities, but in these transactions he and Gould broke relations and they finally became foes. In the break of May, 1884, it was Woerishoffer who led the bear contingent and inflicted heavy trading losses on Gould, only to fall victim to Gould's superior strategic conceptions. Hopkins, another ally, remained for many years the able executive of the Wabash. Sloan, long a stormy petrel in eastern railroad affairs, was another able associate. He fitted in with Gould's plan to extend the Lackawanna to Buffalo and worked closely with him in rate-cutting tactics in eastern territory.

These business partners were more than fellow directors or business managers and operators. They were men of capital and of influence. Some who served on the Gould boards, like the presidents of the eastern trunk lines, Huntington of the Southern Pacific, and bankers like Morgan and Taylor, were not his associates. They collaborated because at that time his interests were theirs. Morgan and Taylor, for example, appeared on the Western Union board because they were large stockholders. The former appeared on the New York Central board with a Gould associate—Humphreys of the Wabash—because he (Morgan) was the banker of both the New York Central system and of Vanderbilt, the largest owner of the New York Central stock.

In explaining Gould's successes in the early eighties, mention must also be made of his press organs. One was the New York World, which he bought from (T. A.) Scott, a purchase which Gould tried valiantly to make appear as unimportant. "It was really a mere accident," he insisted.[^1] Be that as it may, it was nevertheless true that he obtained much free publicity through the paper, and that many transactions were facilitated by its news and editorial columns. For some time, through a loan to its publisher secured by the controlling stock, he had a voice in another New York paper: the Tribune.[^2] Furthermore, one of his helpful associates in the early eighties, Field, owned still another New York paper—the Express—which he bought at a "fabulous" price,[^3] and which he later united with the Mail.

Gould's associates, those who worked with him as managers of his properties, as advisers, financial aids, stock-market operators and traders, were usually stockholders. They served as directors primarily because of their ownership in the property. Some of them were paid executives such as Hopkins of the Wabash and (John F.) Dillon and General Wager Swayne, counsel of the Union Pacific. Dillon resigned a judgeship in the West to come East to take a law professorship at Columbia University, but the real inducement was said to be the position of counsel to Gould's concerns at an annual salary of $10,000.[^4] Most of his associates, however, Field, Humphreys, Sage, Sloan, Marquand, and Hopkins, helped Gould carry the burden of corporate ownership, thus enabling him to spread his funds over many properties and yet retain control.

The greater part of his railroad empire, even at the peak of his influence in 1881, was kept together by minority holdings, and occasionally by no holdings at all. Only in three major properties did Gould act as a proprietor interested permanently in the welfare of its business. He never relinquished his stock control of the Missouri Pacific, the Western Union, and the Manhattan. Of these, only the Missouri Pacific was a part of his railroad net. This road became in the spring of 1881 the parent of his southwestern railroad group. He had decided even at this early period to subordinate the interests of the other properties to those of the Missouri Pacific; his interest in the road therefore resulted in a network of adverse influences that crossed and recrossed his railroad empire.

It was difficult for a student of current affairs in 1880 and 1881 to observe the corporate tendencies in Gould's system. Gould moved rapidly from one situation to another. Scarcely a week passed, remarked a contemporary observer, that he did not accomplish something. Acquisition was piled upon acquisition, and rate wars, negotiations and competitive transactions followed each other in rapid succession. Hardly was one sensational development completed, than another was thrown into the hopper of current market news.

Underneath these events numerous adverse interests crisscrossed the corporate structure. In many sections of his empire one set of influences worked in one direction for one company and worked in another direction for another. A policy that favored one group distressed another. The clearest conflict arose between the two corporations in the transcontinental route from Ogden to the Great Lakes at Toledo and Detroit. From the flow of traffic over the Union Pacific-Wabash route, maximum results had been anticipated. This route was important to the Wabash because of the large flow of business expected from the Union Pacific at Omaha.[^5] If the lines acquired by the Wabash, many of which had little local traffic, were to be made productive, the through traffic had to be increased.

The through business, however, was subject to sharp competition. To competitive points the traffic was frequently hauled at low rates. If all traffic were carried on the basis of such rates, many of the strongest roads would find themselves in financial difficulties. Quaint theories of railroad costs were evolved to justify the transportation of through traffic at competitive rates; rates which were far below those charged on noncompetitive traffic. These theories survive to the present day. The through traffic, it was argued, had to be carried by somebody. If a particular road did not carry it, another would. The road refusing to carry the business at low rates would then have no revenue instead of a little revenue.

Since the through traffic did not, however, produce revenue in accordance with expectations, the value of local business came to be more appreciated. The local traffic in the middle seventies, for example, probably saved the Central Pacific and Huntington from financial disaster. The increase in the local business of the Union Pacific in 1874 and 1875 increased the earnings of the road and made Gould's stock commitment good. Local traffic in southern and western Pennsylvania aided the Pennsylvania Railroad in overcoming the losses occasioned by the high-priced leases of the late sixties and the early seventies while in the late eighties about 90 per cent of its business was local.[^6]

Many of the newly acquired Wabash lines had little profitable local traffic, and they therefore looked forward to a large increase in through business to come largely from the Union Pacific at Omaha. Since the latter and the Wabash were under common influence through the Gould holdings it was reasonable to look forward to such results. Gould in fact did in the early stages of the formation of the route divert much of the Union Pacific traffic.[^7]

The diversion could not, however, long continue. If relationships were closely examined, these hopes for large diversion could not bear analysis. The Union Pacific was a westbound as well as an eastbound carrier. Its traffic was preponderantly eastbound. The road, therefore, had a large flow of westbound empty cars. In order to fill those cars, it was necessary to secure business from its eastern connections. To secure traffic westbound from its connections at Omaha, it had to give them eastbound traffic. So long as there was no transcontinental competition the consideration was unimportant. With the completion of the Atchison and the Burlington systems to a connection with the Denver this principle could not be overlooked. Little of the Wabash traffic moved west. The Iowa Pool roads, on the other hand, carried a large volume of westbound business. At Chicago the Lake Shore, Pennsylvania, and Baltimore & Ohio brought a heavy tonnage of such business. If the Union Pacific delivered its eastbound traffic to the Wabash, then the Chicago-Omaha lines would deliver the traffic received at Chicago to its competitors. By the summer of 1882 both the Atchison and the Burlington had completed routes competitive with the Union Pacific over which, via connections, they were able to carry traffic between the Missouri Valley and the Pacific coast.

The Wabash was destined to receive relatively little eastbound transcontinental business. The Missouri Pacific system in order to aid the Wabash urged its shippers to move business by that road. Billing arrangements to facilitate the movement of traffic from Dallas to Chicago over the Missouri Pacific-Wabash route, for example, were uncovered by the Burlington in the fall of 1882. This policy having never been disclosed, the latter's traffic official wrote frigidly to the Missouri Pacific, "I presume these things are in accordance with the policy of your company."[^8] To avoid retaliation by the Burlington, the Missouri Pacific could not therefore continue its policy of traffic friendship for the Wabash. The Missouri Pacific, Iron Mountain, and Texas & Pacific also produced a volume of eastbound business which was traded at St. Louis. To get westbound business at St. Louis from the Pennsylvania, the Illinois Central, and other lines, it was necessary to trade some of their eastbound traffic. In order to increase the earnings of the Missouri Pacific, Gould sacrificed the Wabash in which his holdings were light.

In the southwestern group, the heart of his system, another set of adverse influences developed. In northern Texas the lines of the Kansas & Texas and of the Texas & Pacific met and crossed each other. While this connection facilitated the movement of joint traffic, the traffic movements could be adjusted to favor one road at the expense of the other. Both local business and business received from connections (including that coming north from the International) could move further north either via the Kansas & Texas or via the Iron Mountain. On the southern end of the southwestern railroad system, other possibilities of clashing traffic influences existed.

Gould in control of these properties could build up the earnings and improve the market value of the stock of one road, thereby impairing the earnings and reducing the market value of the stock of another. To sustain one part of the system he was forced to injure others. It may be asked why investors of the time did not understand these influences at work. People bought then, and buy largely now, in response either to psychological hopes or to established records. Speculators prefer the former standard, and investors the latter. The values of the new Wabash and of the southwestern railroads were established in a market boom. In such a period speculators are apt to forget past records and to make their commitments in a spirit of abounding hope. Investors, on the contrary, frequently make their commitments on the basis of past earnings and tend to overlook the pernicious evils of static conditions. A property which has done well in the past will, it is assumed, do well in the future. The Union Pacific having paid dividends in depression years was such a property. In 1880 it had absorbed its major competitor and its revenues were rising. Since it had paid dividends in depression it could surely pay dividends in prosperity. The stock was therefore eagerly purchased.

The Wabash, on the other hand, did not have the credit standing of the Union Pacific. Its securities therefore could not be as easily sold. Gould had to watch the market for Wabash securities, since he might easily saturate it with new offerings. Demands for capital by the Gould roads in 1880 and 1881 were so large and insistent that it was necessary to secure additional supplies in Great Britain. Because of their losses in Erie in the seventies, Gould was persona non grata with British investors. Nevertheless he did succeed in selling securities by a circuitous way to a large British clientele.

Some of the capital necessary to build up the Wabash system had to be financed through the sale of securities. The construction of the Chicago line and of the Detroit extension, for example, required the expenditure of "a vast amount of money."[^9] Accordingly the Wabash created a general mortgage, authorizing the issue of $50,000,000 of bonds, of which $33,000,000 were reserved to retire existing bonds at maturity, and the balance for equipment, improvements, and other purposes. Mortgage restrictions upon the issue of bonds and the use of the proceeds were exceedingly lax, and the abuses flowing from the grant of such wide authority to borrowing corporations led to the emergence of the Morgan restrictive mortgages of the nineties.

These Wabash bonds and other securities were sold in England through the good offices of the Great Western. The renewed Gould-Vanderbilt rift had been followed by a new Great Western-Wabash arrangement from which the Great Western expected much. The profits from the Wabash contract were stressed both in railroad circles and in the British press. Whatever benefits the Great Western had already realized from the Toledo junction, declared its president, were to be "infinitely enlarged by the direct connection now contemplated at Detroit."[^10] When a British paper, described sarcastically as a "society journal," remarked that any railroad (referring to the Wabash) of Gould or Field should be "fought shy of," one of the leading railroad journals replied that this was not a correct statement. Field was no longer a member of the board of the Wabash, and although Gould was a member, Humphreys, who was a member of the New York Central board, was president and directed its policies. There was therefore nothing in the traffic agreement with the Wabash to create antagonistic interests between the two roads.[^11]

Gould was playing his game well. His technique of creating an interest through the distribution of statements, which were factually correct but did not contain the essential truth, was again at work. Although the prospect of a wholesale diversion of business from the Vanderbilt lines to the Great Western was expected, yet in the period of slightly less than two years between the time of the first Wabash-Great Western understanding and the opening in the summer of 1881 of the Detroit connection, Gould never committed himself. At no time did he state the precise volume of business that the Wabash would give the other line. Neither for that matter did the president nor any other responsible official of the Great Western make such a statement.

So convinced was the Great Western of this financial Utopia to be realized from its relationship with the Wabash that it cooperated with the latter to finance its needs. A few months before the completion of its Detroit extension, the Wabash opened a London office on the premises of the Great Western, with the latter becoming the agent for the former in England. Headed by a local judge, a group of Gould-directed agents moved to England and on the ground of the profitable character of the traffic contract between the two companies sold Wabash securities. The judge, in the language of a Great Western stockholder who led a revolt against the management, "succeeded in placing an enormous amount of [Wabash] stock in England on the faith of the brand which [the Great Western] placed upon it."[^12] The circularization and selling efforts of the Gould agents must have been well directed and far-reaching in their effects. An Englishman some years later made a number of observations which bear the earmarks of intimate acquaintance with the subject.

"The brokers' circulars, which find their way through the post into every country house and rectory, were at one time full of Wabash. Not one person in a thousand had the least idea where the road was, or whence it drew its traffic, or what sort of men conducted its affairs. The advertisements and circulars gave a brilliant account of it; there had been a consolidation, new regions were to be opened up, tremendous interest might be expected. It was an old story; but why should anybody invent a new story when the old succeeds so well? People rushed in to buy the shares with their eyes shut."[^13]

Of the $17,000,000 of Wabash general mortgage bonds sold, about $11,500,000 were disposed of in Great Britain at a price of from 80 to 95.[^14] A precise estimate of the amount of Wabash stock sold in England is not available, although the English stockholder critic of the Great Western management in 1882 described the amount as "enormous."[^15]

Gould meanwhile suddenly appeared on the eastern railroad scene as the head of a new combination to fight the Pennsylvania Railroad. The eastern territory was the fourth major division of his railroad operations—his activities in transcontinental, middle-western and southwestern areas having already been examined in previous chapters. The Pennsylvania had aided Gould's American Union; but now that Gould had the Western Union, he no longer needed the Pennsylvania's help and could afford to become its foe. Even while the Pennsylvania was working hand in glove with his American Union, Gould was working secretly on a scheme damaging to that road. The latter used, but did not own, a link essential to the operation of its through line from New York to Baltimore and Washington. The connection between Philadelphia and Wilmington was owned by the Philadelphia, Wilmington & Baltimore.[^16] The Baltimore & Ohio encountered great difficulties in doing business in Philadelphia and New York, and could reach New York only over the Pennsylvania or by a complicated and unsatisfactory water route. In 1880 when the Reading and the Central of New Jersey jointly completed a new Philadelphia-New York City route, however, the impasse seemed about to be broken. The Baltimore & Ohio could now send its New York City business over a route independent of the Pennsylvania. The latter, however, was determined to prevent its competitor from using this new Bound Brook route, so named from the fact that this town served as a connecting point between the Reading on the south and the Central of New Jersey on the north.

The Pennsylvania, therefore, did everything possible to obstruct the movement of freight over the Baltimore & Ohio's new route. Here was another unique opportunity for Gould. If he could acquire control of the Wilmington, he could at one stroke cut off the Pennsylvania on the South, and induce the Baltimore & Ohio to shift its telegraph lines from the American Union to the Western Union. North of Philadelphia lay the Reading—the country's heaviest anthracite carrier and the major competitor of the Pennsylvania in the Philadelphia area. Despite these advantages, this property under the brilliant and erratic business personality of F. B. Gowen was in receivership. If Gould succeeded in cutting off the Pennsylvania on the south, he would thus be fighting the Reading's persistent enemy. There was therefore every reason for the Reading to permit the use of its tracks as a part of the Philadelphia-New York City route.

The Reading's tracks on the north terminated at Bound Brook and from that point to Jersey City extended the lines of the Central of New Jersey. That road was also in receivership, a victim, like the Reading, of expansion in an inflation period under the leadership of an inveterate optimist—John Taylor Johnston. The receiver, Francis S. Lathrop, a conservative operating man, kept no construction account and charged the cost of betterments to operating expense. In settlement of some outstanding differences over a market battle with Keene, Gould, having secured a stock interest in this road, approached a large stockholder and pictured the alluring possibilities of a union of the road with the Wabash. Gould's charm was again successful and he and his group were admitted to the board.[^17]

Gould, however, had not yet shown his full hand. He was still the friend of the Pennsylvania, which then had no fear of its insolvent competitors, the Reading, and the Central of New Jersey. It was also satisfied with its southern extension, the Wilmington, a prosperous road whose stock was controlled by relatively few shareholders. Approximately 85 per cent was held in Boston;[^18] with the largest block held by Nathaniel Thayer, one of the Boston group of railroad capitalists.

Gould co-operated with Garrett for acquisition of the Wilmington. The syndicate included his major-domos, Sage and Dillon, Garrett, and two major banking houses, August Belmont, and Drexel and Company. Gould approached Thayer who had no particular love for him. In a loose business deal, highly characteristic of Gould's methods, though utterly unlike the careful procedure of Thayer, the latter nevertheless, although owning only 6,000 shares, agreed to sell to the syndicate 120,000 out of a total of 235,901 shares outstanding at a price of 70.[^19]

All was now ready and the trap was about to be sprung. Gould was prepared to step into the eastern railroad picture at the head of a powerful combination to challenge the Pennsylvania. Late in February, 1881, he announced the acquisition of the Wilmington. The blow was unexpected, and it took the railroad and financial world by surprise. Comment was confused, but observers were certain that Gould had again triumphed. One commentator, whose views reflected the judgment of the commercial as distinguished from the financial interests, took it for granted that the Gould and Garrett syndicate "had arranged, beyond all question, for the majority of the stock."[^20]

Here was a combination in the making. Gould, in co-operation with leading bankers and the Baltimore & Ohio, was on the point of aligning a number of strategic roads into a new through route. He was about to unite into a single common business interest two financially weak properties—the Central of New Jersey and the Reading—with two strong properties—the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Wilmington—and thus head a group which would offer the Pennsylvania its most serious eastern competition in the inner gates of its citadel at Philadelphia.

In less than two weeks after the Gould-Garrett syndicate had apparently purchased control of the Wilmington, the Pennsylvania officially announced that it had acquired control. Gould had bought from Thayer but Thayer no longer had the loyal support of the stockholders. He had acted without their knowledge, and had not informed them of the agreement he had made to sell their stock to Gould. They accordingly organized an independent shareholders' committee and communicated with the Pennsylvania.[^21] The Gould syndicate had offered 70 for the stock; the Pennsylvania offered 78 and finally paid 80.[^22] The non-Thayer stockholders delivered their stock to the Pennsylvania and the transaction was completed. Gould's plan thus failed, and the proposed eastern railroad combination headed by himself and Garrett never materialized. The able institution known as the Pennsylvania Railroad had again triumphed.

While thus working with Garrett to form a north-south route through the purchase of the Wilmington, Gould was working with his competitor to form an east-west route. Within a few days after his election to the board of the Central of New Jersey early in 1881, he proposed that the Pennsylvania help him form a new route between New York City and Toledo to make a connection there with the Wabash. Leaving no stone unturned to utilize the strategic location of the Central of New Jersey, he thus proposed to re-establish the through route in the central part of Pennsylvania contemplated by McHenry in 1863. The new line would extend west to a small point in eastern Pennsylvania (Haucks); the Reading would carry it farther west to Milton; the Pennsylvania system would take it to Redbank, near Pittsburgh. From Redbank to Youngstown, Gould would build seventy miles of track, and from Youngstown by traffic arrangements he could reach Toledo and the Wabash. He proposed that the Pennsylvania help the Wabash to carry through traffic between the East and the Middle West, thereby to some extent at least diverting business from its own lines.

Although the Pennsylvania did not immediately accept the idea, neither did it forthwith reject it. Another conference was held in mid-April. Early in May a decision was apparently reached. It was announced that the necessary papers would be signed immediately.[^23] President Roberts, however, was not so sure. He took a firm stand in refusing to permit the use of a system line to compete with the main line of the road. Gould was ready with his usual technique: If the Pennsylvania did not sign, he declared, he would create another through route. In western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio there were a number of financially weak, broad-gauge roads, some of which were owned by Humphreys, president of the Wabash. These roads would be converted into standard gauge, and by short extensions tied in with the Wabash, thereby connecting the latter with Buffalo.[^24]

Although the evidence is not clear, Roberts was not impressed and refused to yield. The board, however, took a hand. Early in June a contract was finally signed giving the Wabash the necessary trackage rights for the movement of through business on condition that the Pennsylvania secure a division of the through rate.[^25] Gould made his usual glowing promises. The through route promised to divert Wabash business from the Vanderbilt lines at Toledo, not to the Great Western at Detroit, but to the Pennsylvania for a connection with the Central Railroad of New Jersey. Such action would indeed constitute a blow to the Vanderbilt system, and perhaps explained the willingness of the Pennsylvania's board to ratify the trackage agreement.

No sooner was the Pennsylvania trackage contract signed than Gould finally acted to conclude a contract for the distribution of the Wabash eastbound business at Toledo and Detroit. The traffic was to be divided equally between the Lake Shore at Toledo and the Great Western and the Canada Southern at Detroit; each road to get one-third of the Wabash business. The contract was a blow to the ambitious hopes of the Great Western. There is little reason to doubt that the Great Western officials had expected far more than one-third.[^26] On the other hand, the distribution of two-thirds of the Wabash business to the Vanderbilt lines could not be interpreted as appeasement. Though Gould frequently compromised and agreed to make concessions to secure elsewhere even more concessions, he did not appease. He presumably gave Vanderbilt two-thirds of the Wabash eastbound traffic in order to secure a fair share of his westbound traffic, which moved over the long haul of the Wabash to St. Louis and beyond over the network of Gould's southwestern lines.

Hardly had this allocation been made than a new disturbing factor emerged. Because of Vanderbilt's concessions, the rate structure in eastern territory had been stabilized since the spring of 1877. Vanderbilt had agreed to a system of freight differentials, which made the cost of railroad transportation more expensive to New York than to Philadelphia and Baltimore. In the traffic boom which followed after the cessation of the depression influences in the fall of 1878, the growth of New York traffic lagged behind that of Philadelphia and Baltimore. In the boom of 1881, the loss of traffic was accentuated. In addition, the New York Central lost business to its competitors.[^27] Vanderbilt, attributing the latter's gain to secret rate reductions, retaliated, and in June, 1881, cut rates openly. The war that followed proved to be the most savage up to that time in the history of the country. For some nine months the war went on. The loss in earnings, remarked one of the railroad presidents, an acute observer of current affairs, was "so much money thrown into the sea. Nobody has got any advantage from it, and no company has obtained any advantage over any other company, for we have all carried about the same proportions of traffic as would have been carried if all had been getting reasonable rates."[^28]

The war almost immediately changed the relative importance of the contracts, routes and other arrangements which Gould had established in the first half of the year. The break in rates combined with the relatively poor grain crop in 1881 diminished the value of the Wabash traffic alliance to the Great Western. The latter had agreed to carry the Wabash cars over its own tracks at a relatively low price.[^29] The new influences reduced the Wabash contract to its proper proportions.

In the midst of the rate war, Gould in conjunction with Sloan decided to carry out a long considered plan of extending the Lackawanna to Buffalo. Gould and his associates were elected to the Lackawanna's board. Taylor's death in 1882 left Sloan as the most influential person in its management, and Sloan and Gould became close allies. The Wabash in the area between St. Louis and Toledo meanwhile cut rates. When therefore, in the summer of 1881, it was decided to press forward with the construction of the Lackawanna extension, Vanderbilt laid plans for a long contest. Although he maintained a common directorship with Gould on the Western Union, he steered clear of him in his railroad connections. With Gould and the Lackawanna at Buffalo, the New York Central would lose that road's profitable westbound anthracite coal business. Vanderbilt's reaction was vigorous and his policies exerted a profound effect on the growth of the New York Central system.

By this time Gould had broken relations also with Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio. His initial move to swing Garrett into his camp by the formation of the Washington-New York City route having failed, Gould tried desperately to buy out the Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph system. Garrett not only refused to budge; he went further, and decided to compete with Gould's telegraph property.[^30] Gould now carried the fight to the camp of the enemy. Looking for the enemy's weak point, he thought he found it in the Ohio & Mississippi, a line which provided the Baltimore & Ohio with its Cincinnati-St. Louis outlet. The Baltimore & Ohio owned a few of the other's securities, but the Garretts personally were the largest owners of the second mortgage bonds, and "by far the largest stockholders in the company."[^31] Other substantial blocks were held in England by those who believed in Garrett and in the future of the Baltimore & Ohio.

Gould's plan to capture the road was conceived in secrecy. He issued neither warning nor threat. On the day before the election, Gould and his retinue of lawyers descended upon Cincinnati and upon its courts. Gould found little difficulty in locating weakness in his enemy's armor. Garrett held the proxies for 7,000 shares. That was not right, said Gould, for he, Gould, had borrowed those shares and was entitled to their votes. He therefore solicited an injunction to stop Garrett from voting them. Garrett proposed also to vote on some of his bonds. The by-laws of the company explicitly provided that bondholders could vote, but Gould wanted Garrett enjoined from voting. Garrett proposed that the board as usual appoint the tellers; Gould insisted that the shareholders do the appointing, and that the board be enjoined. The judge issued the injunctions. Garrett, however, sent his counsel over and gave the judge more facts, and early next morning he dissolved the injunctions, and the election proceeded. The vote was close; the Gould trinity, to which was added Humphreys of the Wabash, had 120,920; but the Garretts had 153,500.[^32]

Gould by his shifts from one party to another, by his efforts to advance the interests of the Western Union, and by depressing the rate structure of the Wabash in order to advance the earnings of the Missouri Pacific, had made enemies of both Garrett and Vanderbilt. Some permanent effects soon became evident. In order to secure westbound traffic in exchange for that lost as a result of the Lackawanna extension, Vanderbilt decided to make common cause with the Reading. There was no physical connection between the New York Central and the Reading, but if a traffic arrangement could be made a connection could be built. Vanderbilt had learned from long experience that a contract made with a road in which he had no stock interest could at some critical moment be impaired or invalidated. He therefore decided to acquire an interest in the Reading.[^33]

While Vanderbilt was negotiating with that road, Gould suddenly delivered another blow in a totally unexpected corner, this time in New England. Except for the move to control the Boston, Hartford and Erie in 1868, Gould had made no attempt to establish a foothold in New England territory. That road, soon after its dealings with the Gould-Fisk group then in control of the Erie, fell into financial difficulties and was precipitated into receivership. (Cornelius) Vanderbilt was then a dominant factor in another New England road—the New Haven—and he gave the stock to his son, William H. The old Commodore, in consequence of the trade with Gould over the control of the Erie, had also acquired ownership of a substantial block of the Boston's bonds which he also gave to his son. These bonds were later exchanged for the stock of the successor company in a reorganization following a receivership. (W. H.) Vanderbilt thereby became one of the road's largest stockholders.[^34]

By January, 1882, the route from Boston to the Hudson River, for so many years under construction, was finally finished. The
road was in good physical condition. For more than a decade it had paid little interest on its large debt and had used its earnings to build up the property. Late in 1881 the Railroad Commissioners of Massachusetts expressed the opinion that the road had "the best line of single track in New England."[^35]

Although the road had a through route from Boston to the Hudson River, thus enabling it to bid for through traffic to the west, its connections with New York City were in no way improved. New York was reached via the New Haven, a property in which Vanderbilt exercised an important though not a controlling influence. The road's managers, therefore, felt that a connection with New York independent of the New Haven was indispensable to its success. To reach the city several alternatives were open. It could build an extension from Danbury, Connecticut, to the Manhattan Elevated, which by the end of 1881 was securely under Gould's control. Secondly, it could connect at another point with a small line known as the New York City & Northern, a financially weak property which, because of its location and lack of connections, seemed doomed to a life of continuous poverty. A short extension by this road would enable the Boston to reach New York City and thus compete with the New Haven monopoly. And in the third place it could reach New York over Vanderbilt's New York and Harlem.

Here were the elements of a free-for-all fight. The New Haven, on whose board of directors Vanderbilt sat, controlled the New England-New York City business, and it seemed that with the aid of the eastbound traffic flowing over the Vanderbilt lines, sufficient inducements could be made to trade some traffic for an agreement by the New York & New England[^36] to move its New England business south over the Harlem. Furthermore, Vanderbilt was an important stockholder in the line. Gould, on the other hand, had no interest in the road, or at least so it appeared.

In the contest for control of the road Gould's promises rose superior to Vanderbilt's realities. While Vanderbilt was in secure control of his properties—the Lake Shore, the Harlem, the New York Central, and the Michigan Central—Gould had only a tentative and incomplete control over his. While the New England's management was succumbing to the Gould touch, while arrangements were being made to sell a block of the stock of the road to the Gould group at a price substantially below the prevailing market price, and while the road's directorate was being changed to include Gould and his associates, the public was informed of the extraordinary prosperity which was bound to ensue. "We have now," said a member of the board, "secured a position of power and influence and traffic, making this line second to none coming into the city...." To another board member of some years' standing, the new alliance with Gould "made his head swim,"[^37] referring of course to the great possibilities from the Gould combination. Even the Governor of Massachusetts was convinced. "Strong men," he wrote, referring to Gould and his associates, "have it [the New England] in hand. Its prospects were never better; and, though large expenditures must still be made to perfect it, there is reason to count on its future appreciation and ultimate great value."[^38]

Gould had won again. Vanderbilt had lost again. At the annual election of the New England in December, the Gould triumvirate were elected to office. To this group was added Field who, through his union with Gould in the Manhattan merger a few weeks before, had become a new associate. In addition, two others were introduced: Roberts, president of the Pennsylvania, and Jewett, president of the Erie. A consistent journalistic Gould critic believed that this board was "a pretty clever stroke on the part of Gould."[^39] The new combination, it continued, would give the Erie a new direct route to New England. The New England would get both the business of the Erie and that of the Pennsylvania because the two roads were represented in the new board. It is strange to a point that passes understanding, that an able and well-informed journal, which had for more than a decade been unstinting in detecting the flaws of Gould's corporate structures, could fall into this habit of believing that mere representation on a board was sufficient to divert business. Gould promises to support such views were issued in rapid succession. The Gould trio and Field agreed with the road's president to build a New York City connection. Seven million dollars were needed to finance the program. The Gould group, shortly after the stockholders' meeting at which they were elected to the board, subscribed to $7,000,000 of the company's bonds. This subscription was not honored.[^40]

Entrance into the heart of New York would be secured by using the lines of the Manhattan. A central depot to take care of the passenger business of the Wabash and the Lackawanna, as well as that of the New England, would be erected. Both the president and the board looked forward with confidence to the success of the program, the former asserting that the new combination "meant simply this—that we should have a double-track steel road fully equipped from the heart of the city of Boston through our principal cities to New York, and also to the Hudson River."[^41] And the stockholders at the meeting which placed the Gould combination in office by formal resolution requested the directors to secure a New York City line other by lease, purchase, or construction.

All this and more Gould promised to secure. Just what his objectives were in making these promises is difficult to determine. He and Vanderbilt were then engaged in a major struggle and perhaps he entered New England as a means of embarrassing Vanderbilt. Vanderbilt himself made some half-hearted and ineffectual attempts to invade Gould's territory. He entered into negotiations, for example, to capture control of the Texas & St. Louis, a road which was beginning to edge into the territory of Gould's Iron Mountain. Perhaps both contestants interested themselves in properties located far outside their main areas to increase their trading strength.

---

## Notes for Chapter XVI

[^1]: New York World, May 13, 1883.
[^2]: Boston Herald, cited in Ry. Review, Jan. 17, 1880, 33. According to a member of the Burlington board, the New York Tribune "was entirely" under the control of Gould, who owned a majority of the stock. Burlington archives, Griswold to Perkins, Dec. 13, 1876.
[^3]: New York Herald, Sept. 28, 1882.
[^4]: Ry. Review, Jan. 17, 1880, 33.
[^5]: Even such an able railroad man as Perkins of the Burlington believed that Gould could pour traffic from the western roads over the Wabash. Perkins expresses this judgment in a letter to Geddes, Nov. 24, 1879, found in the Burlington archives.
[^6]: Transportation Interests of the United States and Canada, Report No. 847, Senate, 51st Congress, 1st Session, 1890, 220, George B. Roberts.
[^7]: Burlington archives, Potter to Perkins, Aug. 30, 1880.
[^8]: Ibid., Ripley to Frink, general freight agent, Missouri Pacific, Oct. 11, 1882.
[^9]: Hopkins, 1st vice president, Wabash, in New York World, cited in R. R. Gaz., Oct. 29, 1880, 567.
[^10]: Statement by the president, Great Western, at the semi-annual shareholders' meeting, cited in Herapath's Ry. Journal, Oct. 23, 1880, 1199.
[^11]: Herapath's Ry. Journal, July 10, 1880, 782.
[^12]: R. R. Gaz., May 19, 1882, 309.
[^13]: Quarterly Review, July and Oct. 1884, 81, "The Romance and Reality of American Railroads."
[^14]: North American Review, Jan.-June, 1888, 182, "A Chapter of Wabash," by an anonymous author.
[^15]: R. R. Gaz., May 19, 1882, 309.
[^16]: Known hereafter as the Wilmington.
[^17]: This account of Gould's original purchase of this stock is taken from the Chicago Tribune, Jan. 12, 1882.
[^18]: This is the statement of Phila. North American, Dec. 16, 1880.
[^19]: Burlington archives, Forbes to Perkins, March 9, 1881. Forbes was present at the Wilmington stockholders' committee meeting, at which the stock was sold to the Pennsylvania, and for this reason his statement of the position of Thayer can be accepted as reasonably reliable.
[^20]: Bradstreet, March 12, 1881, 156.
[^21]: The committee's circular is summarized in Ry. Review, March 5, 1881, 187.
[^22]: This is the price as stated in Burlington archives, Forbes to Perkins, March 9, 1881.
[^23]: R. R. Gaz., May 6, 1881, 256, citing a wire of May 3 from Philadelphia.
[^24]: Phila. North American, May 11, 1881.
[^25]: Ibid., June 9, 1881. As late as 1923 the Pennsylvania Railroad management actively canvassed the idea of establishing a through freight route almost identical with this route negotiated between Gould and Roberts. See "Investigation of Railroads, Holding Companies and Affiliated Companies," Additional Report of the Committee on Interstate Commerce, pursuant to Senate Resolution No. 71, Senate, 76th Congress, 3rd Session, 1940, 1136.
[^26]: R. R. Gaz., May 19, 1882, 304.
[^27]: On the important grain traffic, for example, in the first five months of 1881, the New York Central's proportion dropped from 51.5 per cent in 1880 to 38.8 per cent; while the traffic of its competitors, the Erie and the Pennsylvania, rose, respectively, from 30.4 per cent to 37.7 per cent, and from 16.9 per cent to 21.8 per cent. Public, June 30, 1881, 406.
[^28]: Sir Henry Tyler, president, Grand Trunk, cited in R. R. Gaz., April 14, 1882, 222.
[^29]: Ibid., May 19, 1882, 403.
[^30]: For details, see Chapter XXIII, pp. 462-3.
[^31]: Letter from a former Ohio & Mississippi director to the New York Tribune, Oct. 22, 1877.
[^32]: On this incident, see Ry. Review, Oct. 15, 1881, 573; New York Tribune, Oct. 14, 1881; New York Times, Oct. 14, 1881.
[^33]: For details on this acquisition, see Chapter XVIII, pp. 361-2.
[^34]: For details on the Vanderbilt holdings, see Phila. North American, Jan. 3, 1884; New York Tribune, April 14, 1886; New England Bond Investigation, Field, 533.
[^35]: This was the statement made to the president, according to the Phila. North American, Dec. 9, 1881.
[^36]: This was the name of the successor company to the Boston, Hartford & Erie, and known hereafter as the New England.
[^37]: New York Times, Dec. 7, 1881.
[^38]: Ry. Review, Jan. 14, 1882, 25.
[^39]: Chron., Dec. 10, 1881, 634.
[^40]: New England Bond Investigation, Henry L. Higginson, 209.
[^41]: New York Tribune, Dec. 7, 1881.