## Chapter XVIII - W. H. Vanderbilt Takes the Offensive

By the sophisticated onlooker, particularly the trader and banker, Gould's empire was viewed with suspicion. Most observers were convinced that Gould was still the same as before, that what he bought at low prices he would sell at high prices. Almost every market break was credited to Gould; he was selling his stock or some other stock, or he was shifting his interests in such a way as to facilitate the purchase of a low-priced stock in order to make a market for some other security. At the same time railroad men felt the lash of Gould's whip. Dealing with stocks he acted as a trader; in the field of railroad strategy he was a man of business and as such pressed ahead aggressively, and repeatedly forced issues. He changed the railroad map; he carved new traffic and corporate alliances; he built thousands of miles of road. Railroad men, in considering long-term policies, therefore, had to consider Gould's activities. Even though Wall Street men looked upon him as a trader, as one of their kind, railroad men could not operate without considering his intentions and activities. They could no more ignore him as a trader than they could ignore him as a railroad builder, promoter, or executive.

Both railroad men and traders were correct. If Gould was selling stocks, he may have been selling only part of his holdings. Even though he sold all the stocks of some parts of his empire, he kept other parts intact, and perhaps sold the stocks of still other parts only in such amounts as not to disturb either the majority interest or a controlling minority interest. Even if he sold a controlling interest, he still managed to maintain an influence over corporate policy. If he did not have enough votes to elect a majority of the board of directors, he might have sufficient votes or proxies to elect himself and one or more of his associates.

In 1881 and 1882 Gould's system consisted of three major parts. In the East it was built largely around the Wabash. In the West the Union Pacific was the basic property, while in the Southwest the system was built around the Missouri Pacific with which the Iron Mountain had been almost completely merged. Of these the most complex in the early and middle eighties was in the East, where the four major trunk lines that still dominate this area had already been established. The Pennsylvania, with its through lines between Chicago, St. Louis, Philadelphia, and New York, was the most complete system. The other three trunk lines were as yet incomplete. The Erie, handicapped by a succession of blunders and misdeeds, had no through line of its own to Chicago. Though the Baltimore & Ohio had completed its Chicago line in 1874, it had not built to Philadelphia and New York. The New York Central, though stronger than either the Baltimore & Ohio or the Erie in control of traffic routes, was weaker than the Pennsylvania. It extended only to Buffalo from which point, through the Lake Shore holdings of Vanderbilt, it reached Chicago. The system, however, had no outlet to St. Louis, Cincinnati, and Indianapolis. On the other hand, it occupied a position of strength in the rich traffic area between Chicago and Detroit where the dominant line, the Michigan Central, was controlled by Vanderbilt. The Wabash struck out from its major point of interchange in St. Louis like the vanguard of an aggressive army with its spearhead at Toledo. In the territory between Toledo and St. Louis, it reached more important traffic centers than any road, with the exception of the Pennsylvania.

The Wabash distribution of its eastbound traffic among three major lines in 1881 was made shortly after the trunk-line territory was struck by a violent rate war. Since most of its traffic was competitive, the effect on the Wabash was tragic. Its financial, as contrasted with its traffic, fortunes were at the mercy of railroad rates. More than any other property in the East, its earning power depended upon rates for through traffic. The Wabash, furthermore, on its line from Chicago to Kansas City, was engaged in a passenger war.[^1] While the gross revenue enriched by the heavy through business fed by Gould's southwestern system was increasing, the profit was declining. Gould, however, did not publish the current month-by-month net earnings. He reported gross earnings only, and these revealed growth. In January, 1881, the preferred stock began to pay quarterly dividends, though conservative judgment did not merit such action. Gould, however, had a personal stock-market position to consider, so he paid the dividend—with apologies. Admitting that the earning power was not satisfactory, he held a number of nonrecurring factors responsible.[^2]

Matters did not improve and it was evident as the months rolled on that earnings were declining. Nevertheless, the Wabash preferred dividend due in November, 1881, was paid as usual though the dividend was not earned, and neither was the interest. The cash necessary to pay the dividend was borrowed from Gould and his associates. Before the end of the month the financial condition of the Wabash became generally known, and the price of the stock dropped sharply. By the end of the year the road did not have cash sufficient even to pay interest. Humphreys, president of the Wabash, resigned, and Gould succeeded him.

This is an excellent example of Gould's corporate technique. Gould and Sage, in control of the financial policy of the property, had made advances to the company to enable it to pay an unearned dividend. In a declining market, the payment of the dividend maintained the price of the stock. Gould and Sage, who made small loans to facilitate the payment of a relatively small dividend, sold out most of their holdings at high prices. After thus disposing of his stock, Gould, far from resigning from the board, assumed the presidency of the road. In doing so he consulted no stockholders, called no stockholders' meeting, and took counsel only with himself and possibly with a few of his fellow directors.

Gould's assumption of executive power in the affairs of the Wabash passed over almost unnoticed. The break in its securities had come before he assumed power, and perhaps he was considered by some investors as a rescuing angel. The poor earnings were not made public until the following April when the public was informed that a rise in the year's gross of about 16 per cent was accompanied by a decline in net of more than 20 per cent. The deficit after fixed charges amounted to $1,412,000.

While the investors in Wabash were being harmed, the Wabash itself as a factor in the railroad business was losing none of its strategic importance. Vanderbilt was now convinced of his mistake in co-operating with Gould. He recognized that Gould's cat-and-mouse policy of dangling traffic possibilities, first before the Great Western, and then before his lines, had extorted concessions from each. He therefore decided to strengthen his system in one of its most vulnerable points—the area between Cleveland, Toledo and St. Louis. The Bee Line owning roads to Cincinnati and Indianapolis and a 50 per cent interest in a line to St. Louis had long been a dividend-payer. Because of its excellent earnings and dividend record, its stock sold at a high price—apparently too high to please Commodore Vanderbilt. While he was awaiting the opportunity to acquire the stock at lower levels, McHenry in 1873 on behalf of the Atlantic bought a large block of the stock sufficient to insure control. Amid much legal confusion involving considerable litigation, control of the road in 1874 passed to the Erie. The Erie's title, however, was not clear, and a group of stockholders resisted the proposed transfer of control to that road.[^3]

Precisely how Vanderbilt acquired a controlling interest in the Bee Line is not known. The negotiations were secret, and the event of actual control in the fall of 1881 was a complete surprise, especially to the Erie, which gave the Bee Line four times more traffic than did the New York Central.[^4]

In view of the 50 per cent interest of the Pennsylvania in the road from Indianapolis to St. Louis, Vanderbilt's control was incomplete, and for traffic purposes, ineffective. Joint control of a property in the interests of neutrality, experience had already demonstrated, meant an unenterprising management. Fortunately, the Pennsylvania was willing to step out.

Vanderbilt was now in control of a through line from the Lake Shore to St. Louis. He could, therefore, more effectively fight the Wabash, since he could now exercise a strong influence on the movement of its traffic by cutting eastbound rates from St. Louis.

The expansion of Vanderbilt into the area southwest of Toledo was only part of the battle with Gould. Gould, operating through the Central of New Jersey and Lackawanna, was negotiating traffic alliances designed to divert traffic from the Vanderbilt properties. The Lackawanna's Buffalo extension was aimed at a large flow of New York Central traffic from the Lackawanna. Vanderbilt, in a fighting mood, did not propose to accept this loss meekly and took measures to parry the blow.

In the Pennsylvania anthracite region south of the territory served by the Lackawanna, the Reading originated a heavy volume of westbound traffic which it delivered at Williamsport, Pennsylvania, to the Pennsylvania system. To recoup the New York Central for the anthracite traffic lost by the building of the Lackawanna's extension, Vanderbilt proposed to divert the Reading's westbound business at Williamsport from the Pennsylvania system. The New York Central in turn would divert its eastbound business to Philadelphia from the Lackawanna-Pennsylvania Railroad route to the Reading.[^5] Though the New York Central did not physically connect with the Reading, such a connection could apparently be made at reasonable cost.

To carry out his program Vanderbilt thought it essential to secure a large stock interest in the Reading. The road was in receivership and a contest for control was then in progress. Gowen, a brilliant attorney, a remarkable phrase-maker, a man who carried conviction and thrilled audiences, a man who in many respects was more of a political leader than a business executive, was the leader of one party. He had built up the combined Reading Railroad and coal system. Its original plans for a trunk line to the west were replaced by a policy to insure domination of the coal mines in the Schuylkill area in eastern Pennsylvania. Coal lands were bought with borrowed funds at top prices prevailing in the late sixties and early seventies. The slump in prices after the panic of 1873 broke the back of the Reading, and in 1880 it went into receivership.

An important group of security holders, who had no faith in the brilliant but erratic genius of Gowen, supported Frederick S. Bond—a man sympathetic to the interests of Gould. Here Vanderbilt saw an opportunity. Having learned from his experience with Gould, he resolved to intercede in the family troubles of the Reading, and decided to support Gowen. In July, 1881, shortly after the Pennsylvania-Wabash-Central of New Jersey traffic contract was concluded, he assumed the initiative and asked Gowen to meet him in Saratoga. A bargain was struck. Vanderbilt agreed to use his influence to elect Gowen, and Gowen agreed, if elected, to send the Reading's anthracite business over the New York Central.[^6]

At the annual meeting of the Reading in January, 1882, the balloting was close. The final vote revealed that Vanderbilt had purchased a large block of Reading stock on his own account and had secured the proxies of a number of important groups. With Vanderbilt's help Gowen was elected to the presidency of the Reading.

This new community of interests produced far-reaching results in the eastern railroad industry. Only a few months before, Vanderbilt had insisted upon the importance of the differential problem to New York. Within two weeks after Gowen's election to the presidency of the Reading, Vanderbilt changed his mind. Withdrawing his opposition to the demands of the Philadelphia and Baltimore roads, he joined with the other trunk lines to submit the differential question to a special commission. The war that had been raging since June, 1881, was settled, and the old rates were re-established. This agreement also provided for the first time for the pooling of eastbound freight in trunk-line territory.[^7]

Vanderbilt, meanwhile, made arrangements to secure a physical connection with the Reading. A small property with a charter was acquired; a number of new companies were organized; and plans for the building of additional trackage were made. By these means, the Reading at Williamsport was connected with the New York Central in southern New York, thus creating a new route for the westbound movement of anthracite over the Reading-New York Central lines. The cost was heavy. Although the initial mortgage amounted to $2,500,000, Vanderbilt finally invested about $20,000,000 in the project.[^8]

Vanderbilt was now assured of westbound coal business to replace that lost to the Lackawanna's extension. The gain to the New York Central, however, was a loss to the Pennsylvania, and the latter was therefore determined to block the new Gowen-Vanderbilt combination. A curious corporate melange soon emerged—a situation so relished by the ingenious mind of Gould.

Gowen, in control of the Reading management, was anxious to work with Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio, and Garrett was equally anxious to work with Gowen. Both wanted to get to New York City but that goal could be realized only by the acquisition of the Central of New Jersey. Gould early in 1882 was still in control of that line, even though he had sold most of his stock. Instead of retiring from the Central of New Jersey, however, he suddenly became active. Although only a year before he had fought the Pennsylvania through his effort to capture the Wilmington, he now became its great friend and ally. Since acquisition of the Central of New Jersey by the Reading would increase their competitive strength, the Pennsylvania was determined to block the union. The Central of New Jersey had outstanding about 185,000 shares—which could be increased only with the consent of two-thirds of its stockholders, and about $8,000,000 of callable bonds. An ingenious scheme was devised—a scheme which for surprise, secrecy, and boldness rivaled even that of the great bond-stock conversion of the Erie in 1868. With the support of the influential Pennsylvania Railroad[^9] a bill was quietly pushed through the New Jersey legislature—"a brief and apparently unimportant bill"[^10]—to authorize the company to sell 80,000 shares of common stock to finance the retirement of the bonds. If the Gould group bought all the stock, it would have the controlling interest. It was a lovely scheme and almost succeeded. According to one source, the Gould group had planned to buy the entire block before the Garrett party could get a single share, although this report was denied by the vice president and a board member.[^11]

In the legislature Gould in co-operation with the Pennsylvania was influential. The president and receiver of the Central of New Jersey, Judge Lathrop, knew every legislator personally. This friendship did not, however, extend to the governor, and the bill was vetoed. The assembly then passed it over the governor's veto, and the case went to the courts. Gould was unfortunate with the courts of New Jersey in 1882 as he had been with the courts of Ohio in 1869, and after considerable delay the new stock issue was enjoined. For the first and last time the Pennsylvania and Gould were jointly and simultaneously defeated.

Gould's influence in the Central of New Jersey was now approaching its end. Although he had but little financial interest in the property and had no system use for it, he did not give up without a fight. The Garrett-Gowen party appealed to the receiver for the necessary authority for a stockholders' meeting. The law as usual was technical. There were many delays and not until late in May did the court order a stockholders' meeting for the specific purpose of electing a new board. Even as Gould surrendered, he kept on fighting. In exchange for some stock, he agreed to support the Baltimore & Ohio in its efforts to acquire a line into New York City, while Garrett agreed to make "certain concessions" in shaping the policy of the Baltimore & Ohio Telegraph. What that statement meant, however, was not clear.

Within little more than a year after his appearance in eastern territory, his influence as a factor in the determination of policy was revealed in its correct proportion. The through route via the Central of New Jersey and the Pennsylvania traffic contract was only a market hoax enabling him to make an excellent trade of a large block of Central of New Jersey. It was a skillful piece of work, requiring patience in accumulation of the stock, careful negotiations with a leading trunk line to make the Central of New Jersey to appear what it was not—a part of a new through route between the Lakes at Toledo via the Wabash and the eastern seaboard, and patience and skill to distribute the stock at higher prices in the summer and fall of 1881.

In his capacity as a factor in the affairs of the Lackawanna, however, Gould's position was more permanent. When the extension was first projected in the summer of 1880, it was not clear how he would connect his Wabash at Toledo with the new extension in Buffalo. In April, 1881, however, a new project promised to modify traffic alignments in such a way as to give the Wabash the desired connection. At that time a syndicate led by George I. Seney, Samuel Thomas, and C. S. Brice organized a new company, the New York, Chicago & St. Louis,[^12] popularly known as the "Nickel Plate," to build a line from Buffalo to Chicago, designed to parallel the Lake Shore. When completed the road would make an ally of the Lackawanna or the Lehigh Valley—the latter an anthracite carrier which through a trackage arrangement with the Erie also reached Buffalo.

The road was extravagantly built, a typical product of a construction company arrangement. Brice was the major beneficiary of the venture. Although he did not have $500 in ready cash, he managed to subscribe to $500,000 of the construction company's stock.[^13]

Since it was built not to operate a line or necessarily to do a railroad business, but to force another group to buy it and leave the promoters with a profit, little stress was placed upon good construction. The more cheaply the line could be built, the greater the promoters' profits. Consequently the road was poorly built. Vanderbilt himself, in a sarcastic and savage interview, expressed his opinion of the property thus: "It is a poor piece of work," he said, "and you can't tell me anything else, for I know it to be a fact. I hear that on the trial trip they went over some parts of the road at the rate of nearly a mile a minute. Well, somebody else will strike some of their elegant trestle work some of these days and go over it a mile a minute and faster too. . . . No man or set of men with sound sense could expect to build such a road and operate it to make it pay. . . . They seem to think that because the Lake Shore, an old well-established road in splendid working order, is doing a large and successful business, they can rush right in with a half-built road and do likewise. . . ."[^14]

By October of 1882 the road, although it had not yet acquired Chicago terminal facilities, was about finished, and it appeared clear that by early November it would be ready to do business. The promoters were in touch with the Lehigh Valley, and according to its vice president, there was "a tacit understanding" that upon its completion, it would buy the property. "One thing is certain," stated this official, "our people fully [intend] to buy the Nickel Plate."[^15] Representatives of the road may have also negotiated with Gould, for on a trip to the West in late October, Gould, accompanied by the vice president of the Wabash, remarked to some of his friends that he had been invited to examine the road and give an opinion.

How much truth there was in these rumors and reports it is impossible to say. The property was in poor financial condition. By early summer of 1882, the price of the stock having declined substantially, it is probable that Gould was anxious to acquire control, though he was not willing to pay a high price for the stock of a road which was not earning its interest. Gould, however, denied any such intention. "I don't meddle with Eastern lines at all," he declared, "and never had a dollar's worth of interest in the Nickel-Plate Railroad, nor did I ever have any negotiations with anybody with a view to secure it."[^16]

It is impossible to state the precise moment at which Vanderbilt decided to acquire control. Only a few weeks before he bought the stock of the company, he had denounced the road as a high-cost, poorly operated machine. On the face of things it probably would have been well to leave the property alone and to take the chance of acquiring it in receivership. Gould, however, had repeatedly shown his ability to use a property aggressively for the purpose of tearing down values, and it was probable that the Nickel Plate in the hands of Gould could be made the basis for a new major trunk line in eastern territory.

These are only inferences, and the truth may be found elsewhere. In any event, Vanderbilt late in October suddenly purchased control. The acquisition, however, was not as surprising as the high price paid. According to one account, written many years after the event, the promoters were close to bankruptcy, and had the contract not been made, Thomas and Brice would have been paupers.[^17]

Vanderbilt did not include the Nickel Plate in traffic routes in such a way as to shut it off from alliances with other roads. The Wabash and the Lackawanna were free to make arrangements with it, although to promote stability in the rate structure Vanderbilt insisted that the Nickel Plate should get its percentage of the regular rate.[^18] Vanderbilt had thus checked the Wabash at Toledo and he must also have believed that he had prevented it from extending its rate cuts to the territory east of that point.

The unsettling influence of the Wabash on the fortunes of the New York Central system was by no means exhausted. The 1881 contract for the distribution of Wabash eastbound traffic proved unprofitable to all concerned. Shortly after he assumed the presidency of the Wabash, Gould gave notice of his intention to abrogate the contract, an action which had far-reaching consequences. Proposals for many years had been repeatedly made to merge the Grand Trunk with the Great Western. The latter's friendship for the Wabash blocked the union. The Wabash contract cancellation destroyed that friendship. In May, 1882, the old board of the Great Western resigned and a new one pledged to carry out the merger with the Grand Trunk was elected.

This corporate union destroyed the profits of the traffic interchange between the merged system and the Vanderbilt lines. Since the new system competed for business at Chicago with the Lake Shore, it was to the interest of the Grand Trunk (as the new system now was called) to carry freight over its own lines from Chicago through Detroit to Buffalo and the East. On westbound traffic it was more advantageous to carry the business over its own long haul to Chicago. It was therefore no longer profitable for the Michigan Central, as part of the Vanderbilt system, to divide its eastbound business between the Canada Southern and the Great Western in exchange for the westbound traffic delivered by the latter. With the Great Western now part of a competitive system, Vanderbilt decided to acquire control of the Canada Southern and to divert all of the Michigan Central's business over that line, thereby moving the eastbound and westbound business over a combined system route between Chicago and Buffalo via Detroit.

Unification between the Canada Southern and the Michigan Central was finally consummated in November, 1882. Vanderbilt found it impossible to induce the stubborn Hollanders who had a controlling interest in the Canada Southern to sell their stock. Nevertheless they had confidence in Vanderbilt and raised no objection to the execution of a twenty-one-year agreement by which the Michigan Central agreed to operate the Canada Southern, with the earnings of the two roads paid into a common treasury.[^19] This agreement proved to be a permanent influence in the financial and industrial life of the country. The Canada Southern-Michigan Central route between Buffalo and Chicago became in the course of time an indispensable part of the enlarged Vanderbilt system. The event might have happened normally without the encouragement of Gould and his ambiguous traffic policies, but in fact it was the dillydallying and the shift of traffic agreements and business loyalties between the Great Western and the Vanderbilt interests that produced the new alliance.

The new Grand Trunk system became an ally of the Gould lines. It was the only independent connection between the Lackawanna at Buffalo, completed just about the time of the execution of the Michigan Central-Canada Southern agreement, and the Wabash at Detroit. The power of Gould through the Wabash to throw traffic over either the Vanderbilt lines at Toledo or the Grand Trunk at Buffalo was now curtailed. The strategic bargaining strength of the Wabash was reduced and that of the Lake Shore increased.

Under these conditions it would have been prudent for Gould to aid in stabilizing the railroad rate structure and in that way improve the earnings of the Wabash. Gould, however, repeating his decision of 1879 and 1880, did not choose that path. For more than a year following the 1882 agreement, eastern rates had been well maintained. Albert Fink, the able chairman of the association which supervised the operation of the pool, remarked late in that year that the trunk lines since the middle of March had "very effectually maintained" their tariffs.[^20] Gould, however, was not content with the arrangement, and could not forego the advantage of every opportunity for scalping business. He was soon to discover that Vanderbilt had made his last gesture of concession.

Fink early in 1883 had referred charitably to some irregularities which appeared to disturb the picture of rate harmony. The truth was more serious than that pictured by the tactful chairman. Gould, followed by Vanderbilt, had indeed introduced practices which violated, in spirit if not in letter, the entire intent of the pool. The rates applied only to through traffic from Chicago to St. Louis to the seaboard, and not to intermediate points. A western road at St. Louis in billing its eastbound traffic was therefore free to make rates to these intermediate points at a figure less than the mileage proportion of the through rate. Combined local rates, contrary to railroad experience, was therefore less than the through rates. This practice, known as short billing, was a form of deception and was so denounced by Fink.[^21]

Another practice, equally repugnant to the spirit of the pooling agreement, was reported to Fink by the Wabash. Complaint was made that the Vanderbilt line out of St. Louis made half-number waybills which were not reported to the pooling commissioner. Investigation confirmed the truth of the charge; but it was discovered that the Wabash had also adopted this practice but on a much larger scale. Inasmuch as under the terms of the pool each St. Louis road received an equal amount of traffic, carriage of unreported freight was another deception upon the other members of the pool. "This is," remarked Fink, "perhaps, the most utterly scandalous of the many scandalous tricks that have been played in the traffic departments of the railroads. The St. Louis railroads are virtually partners, and the failure of one to report any of the pooled business is equivalent to one partner's pocketing a payment due to the firm."[^22]

The 1881 rate war meanwhile had produced heavy financial losses to Gould's eastern railroads. Two of them—the Wabash and the New England—were embarrassed at once by an abundance of traffic and a scarcity of earnings. Following Gould's assumption of the presidency of the Wabash in 1882, there were continued reports of declines in earnings. Gould denied such reports. Similar denials came from the New England. Both roads were choked with business, but the business was moved at low rates.

The financial condition of both these Gould lines, however, grew more desperate. Publication of the Wabash annual report for 1882 revealed a condition which shocked both speculators and investors. While the gross revenue rose sharply, the company did not earn its fixed charges. The road was face to face with receivership, and unless outside aid could be secured a flight to the courts for relief against pressing creditors seemed inevitable. Gould could have abandoned the line just as he had others; as only the year before he had dropped the Central of New Jersey and its projected through route in eastern territory.

The Wabash, however, although financially decrepit was an invaluable aid to Gould. He was primarily interested in his southwestern system, and for that very reason he was interested in the Wabash. Jointly with the Missouri Pacific, the Wabash controlled the St. Louis terminal facilities and made through routes and joint rates. In control of both lines, Gould could keep rates of the southwestern roads high and the rates of the Wabash low. In behalf of his southwestern lines it was essential to keep the eastern rate structure unbalanced, since low rates on the Wabash meant higher rates for the Missouri Pacific. This is what informed critical judgment for some years could not comprehend. Observers predicted a conclusion upon a balanced eastern rate schedule, even when it was essential to Gould, as master of the Wabash, to unbalance that schedule. Gould therefore decided to maintain control of the Wabash. In view of its inability to cover its fixed charges, his retention of the line posed a definite problem.

His resourcefulness had rarely failed him in the past and it did not fail him now. After he bought a large block of the stock of the Wabash at the prevailing low prices, he proposed a lease of the road. To insure approval of the idea, he obtained first the support of a group of foreign shareholders, with the Morgan-London firm cabling its approval.[^23] The lease was to the Iron Mountain (a lease to the parent Missouri Pacific would have been illegal), most of whose stock was owned by the Missouri Pacific. The lease did not guarantee the unconditional payment of the fixed charges of the Wabash. In form it was a net earnings lease similar to that of the Kansas & Texas. If the road had any earnings, the lessee generously permitted the lessor to keep those earnings; but if the lessor had no earnings, then the lessee could, if it wished, lend money to enable the lessor to pay its fixed charges. The lessee was free at any time to decide that it no longer felt it wise or advisable—these terms being defined in the light of their own interests—to pay the lessor's fixed charges. Little wonder that Sage, ever the confidant of Gould, exclaimed in high glee that the lease would "be a great thing for all of us—there is no doubt about that. Why, it will be another Kansas & Texas lease—that's it. We shall give the Wabash its net earnings but nothing more. We shall guarantee nothing."[^24]

The lease served Gould well. The southwestern lines and the Wabash were now operated as one. Though Gould solved his immediate problem of preserving the solvency of the Wabash, he accomplished little in preserving the eastern rate structure. The competitive situation in the summer months became more and more critical. Late in the spring the Lackawanna made a bid for a heavy sugar contract. It organized a fast freight line with the Nickel Plate and the Grand Trunk, thereby offering a through line to Chicago, and with the help of Vanderbilt's Bee Line, it was able to establish a route to St. Louis. Suddenly early in May, Vanderbilt announced that he would refuse to haul Lackawanna cars over his St. Louis line, thus forcing the Lackawanna to withdraw from the business. Vanderbilt thus had thrown off the mask of friendship.

Intra-industrial warfare soon became so keen that the eastern railroad presidents finally decided to try to restore stability. In a meeting held a few weeks after Vanderbilt's action, they charged the Grand Trunk with having participated in the Lackawanna's rate cuts, a charge which the Grand Trunk denied. The meeting accomplished nothing. A renewed effort was then made to induce the Lackawanna to join the pool, but the Lackawanna refused.

Gould was momentarily placed on the defensive. His thrust at Vanderbilt for his refusal to carry the Lackawanna's cars to St. Louis was ineffective. After weeks of negotiation he succeeded only in making a deal with the Grand Trunk for the formation of a new route, consisting of the Grand Trunk to Detroit, the Wabash beyond Detroit to a small point in northern Illinois, and the Baltimore & Ohio from that point to Chicago. Although the Lackawanna could now compete for Chicago business, the route was circuitous and could operate successfully only by virtue of a differential rate.

Meanwhile the war of rates which so many had dismissed as of slight consequence was about to be converted into a struggle of major proportions. The Lackawanna first reduced rates on westbound business. The New York Central and the Erie followed. The Lackawanna stoutly maintained that it was not cutting rates, and continued to report its traffic to the Joint Executive Committee operating the eastern trunk-line pool.[^25]

The prospect of a wide-open rate war appeared imminent. A meeting of eastern presidents was again called, and again nothing was done. Another meeting at which the presidents met representatives of their western connections soon followed. The Vanderbilt lines insisted that they were the greatest sufferers. Various proposals to settle the difficulties were made. No agreement was reached and the meeting finally ended in talk. No effective sanctions were provided, and there was nothing to induce Gould to change his rate-cutting tactics. The Lackawanna remained outside of the pool—and Gould was free through rate cuts and other devices to capture as much traffic as competitive conditions permitted.

In the first week of November still another meeting of eastern presidents was called. All roads recognized that the Lackawanna was at fault. A decision was finally reached: the Grand Trunk and the other lines agreed that if the Lackawanna continued to cut rates, the pool lines would neither make through lines with it, exchange through cars, nor maintain through connections.[^26]

Regardless of consequences, the pool was forced to act, for now a new factor of major importance had entered the picture. Vanderbilt, after many years of experience with concessions, had decided to engage in an aggressive war on his own account. Early in November both of his lines—the Lake Shore and the New York Central—began to cut rates in order to recover traffic lost to competitive roads.

The pool moved fast. The commissioner, acting upon instructions of the president, informed the Lackawanna that all its western connections including the Grand Trunk would discontinue traffic arrangements. A week later the Lackawanna apparently surrendered by agreeing to divide traffic and maintain rates. Negotiations were immediately opened in order to decide on the division to be made to the new member.

On December 31 the executive committee of the pool offered the Lackawanna an allotment which would give it 50 per cent more net than it had earned in the first ten months of the year. The Lackawanna not only declined the offer, it even refused to arbitrate. Owing largely to the numerous contracts made at reduced rates, it was now carrying a much larger volume than in the first ten months of the year. It now insisted that the increased traffic should be considered in deciding its percentage of the pooled business.[^27] The trunk-line pool, however, had reached the end of its resources. Gould, acting through the Lackawanna, had made compromise impossible and both the Lackawanna and the Vanderbilt lines were cutting indiscriminately. The chairman of the pool, acting upon instructions, informed the Lackawanna that all of its western connections would refuse to move its freight on through waybills, and that freight would have to be rebilled at Buffalo. Any reduction in rates made by the Lackawanna would therefore fall upon it alone since its western connections would accept for their services their proportion of the through tariff rate west of Buffalo. They would accept no rate cuts.

The order immediately went into effect. Gould now recognized that he had gone as far as he could. Since he could no longer cut rates without exacting a corresponding reduction from competitive lines, he intervened to stabilize rate conditions. The Lackawanna board met and authorized him to offer the trunk lines a proposal for arbitration.[^28] Gould acted promptly. Before twenty-four hours had passed he had already made overtures. Sloan, as president, agreed to refer outstanding questions to arbitration, and the Lackawanna withdrew its legal proceedings.

The fight was over, or so it seemed, and the trunk lines could breathe a sigh of relief. They could breathe as easily, probably, as did the Western Union board in August of 1877 after they had bought Gould's Atlantic & Pacific. Gould himself was optimistic. "I think," he remarked, "that [it] is a great thing. I think it will help to restore confidence not only here, but among foreign investors." And then he declared, probably as an afterthought, "I have made up my mind to hold on to the stocks whose value I know. . . ."[^29] The mainspring of Gould's interest in this settlement was thus clarified. It was made with an eye upon the stock market. Gould was heavily involved in the market and a settlement by eliminating the rate war would elevate the price of railroad stocks which he held in abundance.[^30]

Gould was now in his turn to be surprised and confounded. He was now the arbitrator and compromiser. He was trying to conserve something from a threatened wreck. No longer in an aggressive mood, he now wanted peace and harmony. The New York Central insisted that, while it was willing to maintain rates, it would not lose a pound of business regardless of rates. "We have partly recovered our lost business," said an official, "we intend to get it all back, and we will not relinquish a pound of the freight we have recoveredHere's the continuation of the formatted chapter: