# Chapter XIX - Gould Fights the Burlington

In western as in eastern territory, in the period following the end of 1881, Gould's problems were largely dominated by a single personality. In the East, it was Vanderbilt; in the West, it was Perkins. In the renewal of the contest with Gould, Perkins was no longer a subordinate official. As president of the Burlington, he was the leader of an able group, vigorous, yet cautious; aggressive, yet careful not to extend themselves unduly.

When the Burlington built the Denver line in 1882, it delivered a blow at the heart of the Union Pacific's traffic. Ever since its main line had been completed in 1869, that road had encountered no serious competition on through business. The cloudless sky, however, was soon darkened. The Burlington, although the first, was by no means the most important of these competitors. To the north in the summer of 1881, the Northern Pacific had just received encouragement from two sources. It had succeeded first in selling $40,000,000 of bonds. A controlling interest in the road, furthermore, had been acquired by Villard, who was also the dominant factor in the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company. That enterprise had a monopoly on the transportation business in the Columbia Valley. Villard was an enterprising promoter, and in control of these two lines he proceeded upon a plan to complete the Northern Pacific to a connection with the Navigation Company. In two years this task was accomplished and the Union Pacific was flanked on the north.

On the south Gould had tried unsuccessfully to even scores with Huntington by expanding his lines to the coast. Huntington, however, continued to build and expand, and by 1883 had established his own route to New Orleans. The Union Pacific was flanked on the south.

From the Mississippi Valley, in the area served by the Burlington, entered another candidate for transcontinental honors. The Northwestern in the early eighties began to move across the Missouri River into Nebraska. With these lines as a spearhead it held over the head of the Union Pacific the threat of an extension to Ogden unless that line met its views.

Midway between the Union Pacific on the north and the Huntington lines on the south loomed still another threat. There Strong was aggressively leading the Atchison westward to the coast.

In addition to through transcontinental business, the Union Pacific's earning power was dependent upon a large volume of local traffic. The Colorado business in the early eighties was the product of a mining boom. A heavy volume of westbound mining supplies and equipment made this business especially lucrative. The Union Pacific had a monopoly on the mineral traffic of Utah. The Nebraska area, rich in wheat and cattle, was served in competition with the Burlington system.

Months before the Burlington's Denver extension became a reality, the Atchison joined its fortunes with the Frisco—a road with frustrated transcontinental ambitions. The plans had been stopped by excessive financial burdens assumed in the early seventies. When the road was reorganized, it created a separate company—the Atlantic & Pacific—to build its transcontinental extension. Early in 1880 the Frisco entered into an agreement with the Atchison to build the Atlantic & Pacific westward. Both roads agreed to buy its stock and bonds, the necessary cash to be raised from the stockholders of the two parent companies.[^020_1]

By the end of 1881 the combined managements of the two parent roads were pushing ahead with the line. One of these roads, the Frisco, was also expanding in Missouri, Arkansas, and northern Texas, the center of Gould's southwestern territory. Gould offered to make a pooling arrangement but the offer was declined.

Both Gould and Huntington were anxious to stop the onward march of the new transcontinental line. They could not buy control of the Atchison; the stock was closely held by aggressive Boston businessmen. Early in 1880, however, Perkins expressed the fear that Gould and Huntington might purchase control of the Frisco, and thereby block the new outlet to the Pacific Coast.[^020_2]

Perkins's fears were justified. Gould acted first. In January, 1882, he began negotiations for acquisition of the Frisco's stock. Discovering that little stock was available, he asked its president, E. F. Winslow, at what price he would sell his holdings. The answer was curt and sharp: "It is not for sale."[^020_3] The search for a solution was carried on by Huntington who, ascertaining that the firm of J. & W. Seligman & Co. had a substantial block of the stock, asked Gould whether he would be interested in buying. The transaction was made quickly and on the 24th of January Gould on behalf of himself and Huntington bought a little less than one-half of the Frisco's stock.[^020_4] The ambitious program of the Atlantic & Pacific Railroad was curtailed. The road would be built westward only to the Colorado River. To that point from the west Huntington would build a line and give the Atlantic & Pacific a part of the Southern Pacific's business.

From Gould's standpoint, this was not a happy solution. It was possible that business which could be sent east over the Central Pacific and Union Pacific might now be diverted to the Southern Pacific-Atlantic & Pacific route.

Gould must have been dissatisfied with the outcome of his venture into this new enterprise. Although he accepted a position on the board of the Frisco, he did not long hold the stock.[^020_5] This was Gould's first major business transaction with Huntington after the resumption of good feeling ushered in by the agreement of November, 1881. Their relations thereafter cooled, and it was not long until they clashed again on many a business front in the Southwest.

While Gould was trading with Huntington in the effort to stop the growth of one new competitor of the Union Pacific, he was opening up a battle in Colorado which eventually stimulated the growth of another, i.e., the Burlington. In building its line to Denver, the Burlington looked forward to the co-operation of the Denver—still managed by Palmer. Although Gould had been elected to the board in December of 1880, he had never attended a meeting. The Denver early in 1881 had become a competitor of the Union Pacific, and it was therefore obvious that Gould in the Union Pacific would therefore not be on the friendliest terms with that road. It was possible, nevertheless, that as a member of the board of the latter he might follow a neutral, perhaps a conciliatory, policy in stabilizing the competition between the two properties.

The possibility of a friendly alignment between the two roads was rendered impossible by another adverse interest which characterized the Gould empire. Palmer, the president and a large stockholder of the Denver, was a competitor of Gould in the Republic of Mexico. Independently of the Denver, Palmer had promoted an enterprise to build a road from Laredo to the City of Mexico. He and his associates had in fact outbid Gould and his associates, and they had organized a construction company to build the road. Palmer, although an able operating man, had little of the speculative following which Gould enjoyed. When, because of the declining trend of speculative and business activities which developed late in 1881, the subscriptions to the stock of the construction company were not paid, the company was unable to secure funds.

The Denver stock, meanwhile, which had advanced in the boom markets in the spring and summer of the year to a high of 113 had reversed its trend, and by late December had dropped to below 80. Gould, however, had sold his holdings at the high prices, for in June he declared publicly that he had no interest in the stock.[^020_6]

Late in December, 1881, Gould delivered an assault upon the stock, and its price soon declined to 66, reaching 50 in mid-March.

By this market raid, Gould made a new enemy. Palmer was now anxious to retaliate. When the Burlington reached Colorado in the spring of 1882, it found a warm friend, anxious to co-operate to protect its own interests and also to strike at the enemy. Indeed, it was believed that the Burlington would actually acquire control of the road.

In view of the unfriendliness between the Union Pacific and the Denver, it is not surprising that even before the Burlington reached the city of Denver, a local rate war in Colorado broke out. When the Burlington arrived, it was not sufficiently sure of its competitive ground to enable it to follow a definitive rate policy. More as an experiment than anything else it agreed to form a pool applying to all traffic to and from points between Colorado and the Mississippi River.[^020_7] In entering this pool the Burlington underestimated the amount of traffic which shortly thereafter it was able to obtain. Many Colorado shippers who had consigned their eastbound freight via that road discovered that, owing to its small percentage of the pool business, more than half of the freight so consigned had to be diverted to the Wabash and the Alton. The Denver merchants were dissatisfied and the Burlington recognized that its "only salvation was to withdraw from the pool."[^020_8] No serious rate war nevertheless occurred in the first six months of 1882.

Meanwhile negotiations for a new pool and the avoidance of a war of rates were actively considered. On July 15 the Burlington traffic representative in Colorado informed Perkins that, after a prolonged and continuous two-day session, a one-year pool had been made.[^020_9]

It now looked as though the rate harmony which for so many years had prevailed in southern Iowa and in southern Kansas would be duplicated in the area between the Rocky Mountains and the Missouri River. Such however was not to be the case. Gould and the top executive officials of the Union Pacific concluded that rate stabilization would facilitate the Burlington's expansion program in Nebraska and Colorado. Gould accordingly instructed the Union Pacific's executives not to sign the pool contract unless the Burlington agreed to refrain from building extensions in northern Colorado.

Meanwhile, in the absence of a pool agreement, the Denver and the Burlington entered into friendly relationships to the detriment of the Union Pacific. The Denver was giving the Burlington all of its eastbound business, whether consigned or not, and according to a leading Burlington traffic official, the Union Pacific felt this loss in business "very keenly."[^020_10] By late August the two roads were approaching open warfare. The Union Pacific was diverting some of its eastbound freight at Council Bluffs from the Burlington to other lines, and the Burlington, as a retaliatory measure, was considering the idea of diverting some of its freight from the Union Pacific to the Atchison. It appeared to the Burlington officials that the truce on the war of rates could not be much longer maintained.[^020_11]

By mid-September, however, the officials of the Burlington and the Union Pacific resumed negotiations. The Union Pacific backed down on its proposal that it would not enter a pool unless the Burlington refrained from building in Colorado and Nebraska. The Union Pacific's traffic chief now declared that his road had wanted the Burlington to agree not to build for a period of one year only. He therefore inquired whether the Burlington would agree with the Union Pacific not to build into the territory of the other without previous consultation. In this way a rate war could be averted and each road earn a reasonable profit. The Burlington recognized that the promise of the Union Pacific to build no new lines would be worthless unless Gould agreed to bring all his lines in the territory under the terms of the agreement. A Burlington officer accordingly suggested that if the Missouri Pacific could be included in the proposed territorial understanding he would favor the arrangement.[^020_12]

Although the negotiations for a territorial understanding were fruitless, the roads did finally establish a pool. The Union Pacific gave ground, for under the terms of the pool the Burlington received 30 per cent of the business, although in the spring it had expressed its willingness to accept a minimum of 25 per cent. The Union Pacific received 50 per cent and the Atchison the remainder.[^020_13]

The pool appeared to be a master stroke. It seemed that the invasion of a new trunk line would after all not seriously alter existing conditions. The Union Pacific would give up a part of its business to the Burlington, the rate structure would remain normal, and both roads would carry a reasonable share of a growing traffic.

This result did not, however, follow. For, just as the negotiations for the conclusion of the Colorado pool were treading their way over the tortuous path of intercorporate competition, the Gould specter suddenly emerged at Kansas City. At that point the Burlington still depended upon the Hannibal for a connection. Although Gould was on the board of the Hannibal he had sold out his stock, and control of the road remained uncertain.

Suddenly, in September, 1881, under the leadership of John Duff, a Boston stockbroker, the stock was cornered and in a few days its price rose from $96 to $200 a share. Gould and Sage had been selling short in a small way and both immediately took their market losses.[^020_14] Duff found it impossible, after the shorts had settled for their commitments, to sell the remainder of his stock in the open market at any reasonable price. Here seemed to be an opportunity for the Burlington. Duff offered the stock for sale at $50 a share but Perkins and his advisers declined the offer.

Before the end of March, Duff had changed his mind and notified the Burlington that he was no longer interested in selling. "All trades [are] off," he declared.[^020_15]

Although Perkins and his associates declined to pay $50 a share for the Hannibal shares, by the late summer of 1882 they were willing to pay $42. In view of the other advantages of the Hannibal to the Burlington, Perkins was now ready to make a trade. Just about the same time, however, Gould and his associates, Sage, Dillon, and F. L. Ames also decided to buy the Hannibal stock. Gould was as difficult to follow as ever. After blandly assuring the Burlington that he was not interested in the Hannibal, he stepped in and bought just as the Burlington was about to make the purchase.[^020_16]

The purchase of the Hannibal by the Gould interests was a blow to the Burlington and produced consternation in the mind of Perkins. Perkins was ready for the worst and believed indeed that the worst was about to be realized. He was certain that the Hannibal would be used as part of the Wabash, and that road, he observed, would take good care to keep itself informed of all that the Hannibal and the Burlington did, "while the dark tricks of the Wabash would be carefully hidden from our view." He therefore insisted that the Burlington must build to Kansas City. If thereafter Gould retaliated by building to Chicago, then the Burlington would "consider the fences down in all directions and ... build wherever and whenever we think it will pay, especially to Salina, to Lexington, and north of the Union Pacific in Nebraska."[^020_17] Gould meanwhile renewed his oft-repeated threat to build a Chicago line. As late as February, 1883, the president of the Hannibal insisted that Gould had assured him that the extension would be constructed. Officials of the Burlington were also fearful of this possibility. One of the Burlington directors even suggested the idea that the road announce its plans to build extensions into the Missouri Pacific country, thus meeting threat with threat. Forbes, however, was not convinced of the wisdom of such a game. "I suppose," he wrote to Perkins, "you have several other things to do besides playing a game at Bluff with the great Jay Hawker & chief thief."[^020_18]

While both contestants thus threatened to take action or to retaliate against each other, nothing happened. Both in fact misunderstood each other's motives. It may well be true that Gould might have followed the policies anticipated by Perkins in the fall of 1882. With all his experience with Gould, Perkins, nevertheless, had failed to consider the most important factor that motivated Gould's policies—his interests in the Western Union.

Gould made his first approach to Perkins in January, 1883, through a confidential agent. Although no definite decisions were reached, Gould's agent informed Perkins that Gould was preparing to leave the country to be gone for two years and that, among other things, he would like to settle the Hannibal-Burlington controversy. Gould did not want to build to Chicago, nor did he want the Burlington to build to Kansas City. Perkins informed Gould's representative that the Burlington above all was interested in a secure existence at Kansas City. The Gould messenger then stated that he thought the Burlington could buy the Hannibal stock, and he further dropped a hint that Gould had said something about telegraph relations, which he, the Gould agent, did not understand.[^020_19]

The message was the first indication that Gould would trade the Hannibal in connection with a Western Union contract.[^020_20] The hint was not lost upon Perkins. Ten days later the agent turned up with another note from Gould. Gould was willing, he said, to make a general settlement, and he thought the Burlington could buy the Hannibal stock at the cost to Gould plus 6 per cent.

Shortly thereafter at a meeting of the Burlington's board, a committee was appointed consisting of Perkins and Paine, with power to buy the Hannibal upon substantially the terms offered by their present owner, upon condition that a reasonable amount of preferred should be obtained in exchange for a Burlington guarantee of not more than 5 per cent, and if necessary, to agree upon a lease of the Hannibal.[^020_21]

Early in April when the Wabash officials were making their unofficial proposals, Gould returned from Florida. The pace of the negotiations quickened. A long series of telegrams and letters followed each other in rapid succession. The early exchanges resulted only in serious misunderstanding. Coolidge, a board member of the Burlington, as well as of the Atchison, intervened with a telegram to Gould suggesting that the Burlington had already yielded a great deal and that since the differences between Gould and the Burlington were so slight and a telegraph and railroad war was so serious, that he hoped Gould would excuse him for interfering. "I should not do so but I think the negotiations ended without it."[^020_22]

Further negotiations followed, and on April 27 a contract was finally made.[^020_23] Despite all the fears of Perkins and Forbes, the Hannibal was now safely in the hands of the Burlington. Gould, in negotiating the sale of the Hannibal stock, had confounded both his business associates and business enemies. Perkins had believed that the Hannibal would be used to build up the fortunes of the Wabash and tear down those of the Burlington. The president of the Hannibal had been assured that the extension to Chicago would be built, thus increasing the strategic power and competitive strength, if not the financial strength, of the Hannibal. Sage was led to believe that the Hannibal would be used in such a way as to improve the competitive position of an Iowa road in which he was interested. Gould, however, did none of these things. Instead, he sold the road on terms which, while they left his associates little profit, gave him, as the largest owner of the Western Union stock, a reasonable price in the form of an increase in the competitive strength of the Western Union.

Another source of unfriendliness between Gould and Perkins was now removed. Though by the terms of the Colorado pool the Burlington could, if it wished, extend its lines beyond Denver, in the six months which had elapsed since the date of that agreement it had not done so. Rate stability now seemed assured.

Surface appearances were again misleading. Palmer now decided to build to a connection with the Central Pacific at Ogden. He thus invaded Union Pacific territory, in which no competition had heretofore existed. What Gould had threatened to do in November of 1879, Palmer made up his mind to accomplish late in 1882. If a transcontinental route consisting of the Denver-Denver & Rio Grande Western—the name of the new Utah extension—and of the Burlington were formed, the threat to the Union Pacific would be serious. Yet the current financial and trade judgment did not so consider it. Government officials, in accordance with normal expectations, reflected the views of the populace. The government directors of the Union Pacific, reporting early in 1883, stated that the road compared favorably in all respects with any other. The storm of criticism that broke out against the Union Pacific management, only a little more than a year after the publication of this report, presents a curious insight into the legitimacy of hindsight criticism.

Neither was informed railroad and financial judgment of any help to the careful observer. In the spring of 1883, shortly before the outbreak of the rate war, the president of the Union Pacific expressed the bland assurance that everything was well. The Burlington, he said, had been in Denver for nearly a year and yet the Union Pacific had done more business than ever before.[^020_24]

An authoritative financial journal well thought of in banking circles and, incidentally, a strong critic of Gould and his policies, expressed the same convictions.

The staid and stolid investor of New England accepted these assurances at their face value. They were encouraged to do so furthermore by the representations of a valuable public servant—Adams of Massachusetts. He traveled over the Union Pacific system and returned to relate, with enthusiasm, wonderful stories of its strength. The Union Pacific was the Broadway of the country and the main artery of the nation's railroad system. When the Union Pacific stock was dropping, he ascribed the decline to the iniquitous short sellers. He urged people to buy.[^020_25] They bought, and by the end of 1883, 4,800 of the road's 7,000 stockholders came from New England.[^020_26]

The stock market alone spoke in the clear language of truth. While government, public representatives and journalistic sages spoke with assurance, the stock market told a different story. Superficially, optimism was warranted. The Colorado pool had divided traffic among the existing railroads, and rates were stable. It is true that the pool was soon to expire; but, as it is so easy to say when there is nothing else to say, there was no reason to believe that the agreement would not be renewed. Yet in the early fall Union Pacific stock was pressed for sale, one broker reporting that enough stock was pressed for sale "to sink a ship."[^020_27] Early in 1883 the price was still about 100, while a few days later it dropped to 91. The decline was baffling, especially to the New England security holders, who appeared to have a "most profound belief" in its value.[^020_28]

The selling could not be attributed to Gould. He had sold his holdings in the booming months of 1880. One need not go too far afield in search of the identity of the sellers. They came from the ranks of those who spend their waking hours and many of their sleeping hours in interpreting facts in the light of their future possibilities. They were men of financial and business imagination. At times they interpret events and trends inaccurately, and they are called speculators. This is particularly so if their decisions bring losses to others as well as themselves. Such losses are usually exposed in strong and occasionally in vituperative language. Their successes are not well understood, although the results of such successes soon become the well-established facts of the day.

The story which the declining quotations were revealing, the story which the prudent and confident New England investor refused to accept as the truth, soon was expressed in terms of events, for the war of rates soon began. Palmer's Utah extension was finished to a connection with the Central Pacific in April of 1883. An understanding for rate maintenance between the Union Pacific and the new line lasted only a short time. The effort to establish a pool failed and the war followed almost immediately. The rate war soon spread to western trunk territory. In mid-July the Burlington, Atchison and Denver reduced passenger fares between Denver and Pueblo.[^020_29]

Meanwhile the Denver's management was changed. The new board included a number of Burlington friends, thus boding no good for Gould. The new management, in co-operation with the Burlington, assumed the offensive in diverting traffic from the Union Pacific. In the fall of 1883 an official of the Burlington told a Denver executive that whenever his road wished to open a rate fight, the Burlington's line between Denver and the Missouri River could be used.[^020_30] The Burlington, furthermore, forwarded its Utah and California business over the Denver-Denver & Rio Grande Western instead of the Union Pacific. The latter tried to get some of that business from the Burlington by giving that road some of its eastbound business at Omaha. The Burlington's representative raised strong objection to such a proposal. In a short time, he observed, the Union Pacific would so manipulate the Burlington's westbound freight that shippers would send their business all the way by the Union Pacific. "I don't believe," wrote the officer, "our giving business to the Union Pacific at Denver will make them any more friendly to, or put a dollar into the coffers of, the B & M," i.e., the Burlington.[^020_31]

The breakdown of rates between the Missouri River and Utah came in November when a twenty-five-cent rate was established, thus heralding one of the most devastating of all western rate wars. By the summer of 1884, the war had cost the Union Pacific more than $20,000,000 in gross business.[^020_32]

The war was also costing the Denver heavily and in view of its impaired finances it could ill afford the continuous and heavy losses in revenue. Frederick Lovejoy, its president, asked Adams, recently appointed a member of the Union Pacific board, to intervene.

Adams's reaction genuinely shocked Lovejoy. Adams assumed a belligerent tone. If he managed the Union Pacific, he would "force the fighting until some results of a permanent nature were reached." He would look forward to peace only until one party or the other "was thoroughly worsted." Adams rarely used such violent language. "I should certainly strike your road as hard as I could, wherever I could reach it, and I should expect that you with equal certainty, would return my blows." Adams concluded that at the end of the war either one road or the other would dictate terms.[^020_33]

Despite these views, he believed that the course of the Union Pacific had been forced upon it by the Burlington associating itself "in what [seemed] such a thoroughly aggressive way with the Denver."[^020_34] Perkins on the contrary was convinced that the Union Pacific "was deliberately the aggressor in the Utah fight" and had entered the struggle on the absurd theory of Adams, with the expectation that the Burlington and the Atchison would refuse to aid the Denver while the Union Pacific was engaged in destroying it.[^020_35]

The transcontinental rate war harmed the Union Pacific (whose stock Gould was now rebuying on a substantial scale) and also Gould's other railroads. With a reduction in rates from the west to Omaha, the rates to Kansas City would also have to be reduced. The Missouri Pacific, in order to participate in traffic moving from the Union Pacific at Kansas City, would therefore have to reduce its Kansas City-St. Louis rates.

Gould recognized that the Burlington in alliance with the Denver and the Atchison was inflicting heavy damage on his roads. He looked around for an opening to strike back at the Burlington, and, as usual, he discovered a point from which he could deliver a counterattack. That point was the weakened position of the Iowa Pool, which for more than a decade had worked so well. Gould had never surrendered the idea of interfering with its smooth functioning. Early in 1879 before he acquired control of the Wabash, for example, he declared he was "very desirous" of breaking the Pool at that time.[^020_36] By the summer of 1883 the Pool had developed many defects. Two roads—the St. Paul and the Wabash—had been added, and the traffic was now divided between five lines. Of these roads, the Rock Island and St. Paul, with no lines west of the Missouri River, had a common interest in building up the traffic volume of the Union Pacific at the expense of the Burlington.

On December 3, 1883, Gould's hope for the break-up of the Pool was finally realized. On that day a twenty-five-year contract between the Union Pacific, Rock Island and St. Paul—known as "the Tri-Partite"—was made public. Under its terms the Union Pacific agreed to send its eastbound business over the lines of the Rock Island & St. Paul, while the others agreed to send their westbound business over the lines of their ally. The Union Pacific, furthermore, fixed the rates on eastbound traffic, and its two allies on westbound. The Iowa Pool in substance although not in form—the formalities were soon to come—was dissolved.

Meanwhile the rate war on the far western end of the Union Pacific in Utah continued. Suddenly the traffic officials of the Union Pacific asked for terms of peace, and following brief negotiations, a new pool, the Utah Traffic Association, was formed. The pool divided the business between the Missouri River and the Utah points, and between the Utah points and the Pacific Coast. The first public declaration of the terms of peace came in the form of a wire sent to Gould by the general manager of the Union Pacific.[^020_37] Gould was neither president nor an operating officer of that road though he was still on its board, and a member of its executive committee. While he had repurchased some Union Pacific stock, he was still a small stockholder. He was nevertheless in charge of the negotiations.

Gould soon learned that it was easier to destroy than to rebuild. The Union Pacific's new allies refused to follow his lead. These roads, acting in their own interests, refused to recognize the terms of the Utah peace. They declined to approve the settlement unless the Burlington agreed also to make a satisfactory division of its Nebraska business.[^020_38] The fellow members of the Union Pacific in the Tri-Partite, therefore, continued to accept Utah business at cut rates and insisted that the Union Pacific take its pro-rata share. Late in February the Union Pacific began to cut rates in eastern Nebraska, as well as in Colorado. In March the Burlington made a sensational discovery that E. P. Vining, the Tri-Partite commissioner, had, apparently as an officer of the Union Pacific, engaged a person at a small salary to make secret rate cuts against the Burlington. "We want," wrote Vining, "to annoy and demoralize the B & M and their business as much as possible and with as little loss to ourselves as possible." And, he continued, "Do all that you can to increase the ill-will."[^020_39]

Perkins and his fighting traffic assistant were ready for an immediate fight and proposed in conjunction with the Atchison "to knock the bottom" out of Colorado rates, and to terminate the pools east of the Missouri River.[^020_40] Such a policy was too drastic for Forbes. While the rate cuts continued to spread, and the Atchison came out openly in support of the Burlington, Forbes in a succession of meetings with F. L. Ames, Adams and other Union Pacific stockholders arranged informal settlements and temporary truces. The Burlington was now willing to make some concession to the eastern connections of the Union Pacific, though it refused to make any concession on its right to extend lines into new territory. It would build, if necessary, to Ogden or to Montana, and thus share in the growing mineral business with the Union Pacific or if necessary in its own interests to extend its lines into the lucrative Columbia Valley.

It was some time before a final settlement of the war of rates was effected. Gould's Tri-Partite alliance to isolate the Burlington was a drastic failure. Perkins emerged from this contest the undisputed victor. "It is a noteworthy fact," wrote one observer, "that in every case where the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy has gone into a contest, it has worsted its opponents. Wherever this powerful corporation gets a hold, someone has said, no grass will ever grow."[^020_41]

Gould's general policy in western territory must be set down as a failure. By his violation of the territorial agreement of 1880 through the construction of the Missouri Pacific line to Omaha, he invited the Burlington to invade the Union Pacific territory. By his dispute with Palmer of the Denver, he created a close ally of the Burlington in Colorado and thus facilitated the establishment of a competitive line over the Burlington and its new associate from Ogden to Omaha. These were the two moves that, from the Union Pacific standpoint, constituted the primary blunder. Whether it was a blunder to Gould's business interests as a whole is another matter. The Missouri Pacific may have benefited from the Omaha extension, and if this was so, Gould as the largest stockholder of the road benefited correspondingly. Gould may have also profited personally from his operations in the Denver stock.

Gould furthermore came out second best in his contest with Huntington. He had acquired control of the Texas & Pacific in order to build a line to the Pacific Coast. In this attempt he failed. Although Huntington gave him many promises in the agreement of November, 1881, he delivered only a few crumbs of traffic. Huntington built his own route to New Orleans, and diverted the transcontinental business in accordance with his own interests.

Neither was Gould successful in blocking the transcontinental ambitions of the Atchison. The part-interest which he bought in the corporation through which the Atchison was building its transcontinental line served no useful purpose. When in the summer of 1884 Huntington became involved in financial difficulties, as he continued to do from time to time until almost the end of his business career, he solved them in part by selling a Southern Pacific line to the Colorado River to the Atchison system. As a result, the Atchison and the Burlington were able in the summer of 1884 to organize a fast freight service from the Middle West to the Pacific Coast. The new line did not carry much traffic immediately, but in the course of years it came to be a powerful factor in the transcontinental business.

Gould's policies finally led to the greatest railroad rate war that had yet occurred in the Far West. The cost to the Union Pacific was heavy. It was a cost which the Union Pacific could not sustain, and was a primary factor in producing the financial reverses which led to the suspension of dividends in 1884. Almost twenty years passed before the financial wreck was rehabilitated. Not until then, did the Union Pacific stock return to the price at which it sold at the top of the market boom in 1881 or reacquire the investment status which it lost in the middle eighties.

---

## Notes for Chapter XIX

[^020_1]: Details of this agreement are found in Ry. World, May 1, 1880, 420; the annual report of the Atchison, 1884; and Poor's Manual of Railroads, 1885, 845.
[^020_2]: Burlington archives, Perkins to Forbes, Nov. 14, 1880.
[^020_3]: Phila. Press, Jan. 18, 1882.
[^020_4]: New York Tribune, Jan. 26, 1882; Crocker to Huntington, Feb. 4, 1882, M. M.
[^020_5]: New York Times, March 7, 1887.
[^020_6]: Chicago Tribune, June 2, 1881.
[^020_7]: The experimental nature of this pool is referred to in Burlington archives, Potter to Perkins, April 17, 1882. The organization of the pool is noted in R. R. Gaz., Jan. 27, 1882, 61.
[^020_8]: Burlington archives, Potter to Perkins, April 17, 1882.
[^020_9]: Ibid., July 15, 1882.
[^020_10]: Ibid., July 31, 1882.
[^020_11]: Ibid., Aug. 29, 1882.
[^020_12]: Ibid., Sept. 18, 1882.
[^020_13]: Details of these negotiations are found in Phila. Press, Oct. 12, 1882; Oct. 17, 1882; R. R. Gaz., April 21, 1882, 242; June 9, 1882, 351; July 21, 1882, 447; and Oct. 20, 1882, 652.
[^020_14]: Chicago Tribune, Sept. 8, 1881.
[^020_15]: Burlington archives, unsigned letter dated March 22, 1882.
[^020_16]: Ibid., memorandum, Sept. 13, 1882, unsigned, although from the tenor of the argument there is little reason to doubt that the author was Perkins; also Perkins to J. F. Gardner, Jan. 20, 1883.
[^020_17]: The above presentation of the views of Perkins and the quotations are based upon and taken from a letter in the Burlington archives, Perkins to Geddes, Sept. 16, 1882.
[^020_18]: Ibid., Forbes to Perkins, March 3, 1883.
[^020_19]: Ibid., Perkins to Gardner, Jan. 20, 1883.
[^020_20]: See Chapter XXIII, pp. 455-6 for details.
[^020_21]: Burlington archives, "Memo at Board Meeting," dated Feb. 15, 1883.
[^020_22]: Ibid., Coolidge to Gould, April 14, 1883.
[^020_23]: For details on these negotiations, see an unpublished manuscript, "The Hannibal & St. Joseph, 1870-1883," by the author, in the Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois.
[^020_24]: New York Times, May 30, 1883.
[^020_25]: Boston Advertiser, Dec. 19, 1882.
[^020_26]: Phila. North American, Dec. 25, 1883.
[^020_27]: Ibid., Oct. 19, 1882.
[^020_28]: Bradstreet, Dec. 15, 1883, 376.
[^020_29]: R. R. Gaz., July 20, 1883, 486.
[^020_30]: Burlington archives, Potter to Perkins, Dec. 28[^020_31]: Ibid., Aug. 6, 1883.
[^020_32]: This is the estimate in the Phila. North American, Aug. 2, 1884.
[^020_33]: The letter from Adams to Lovejoy, from which the above quotations are taken, is dated Dec. 4, 1883, and is found in the Burlington archives.
[^020_34]: Ibid., Adams to Perkins, Dec. 17, 1883.
[^020_35]: Ibid., Perkins to Forbes, Dec. 31, 1883.
[^020_36]: Ibid., W. F. Sapp to Hon. W. C. James, Jan. 27, 1879.
[^020_37]: New York Times, Feb. 2, 1884.
[^020_38]: R. R. Gaz., Feb. 8, 1884, 118.
[^020_39]: Burlington archives, E. P. Vining to D. M. Came, March 8, 1884, enclosed by Perkins in letter to Forbes, March 17, 1884.
[^020_40]: Ibid., Perkins to Forbes, March 17, 1884.
[^020_41]: New York Times, July 6, 1884.