# Chapter XX - Gould Holds in the Southwest

In less than two years, by acquisition and construction, Gould had established the broad outlines of the through routes between St. Louis and Kansas City gateways and the Rio Grande and Gulf Coast. By connection with the Huntington properties he had also completed the first east-and-west line through Texas and the first transcontinental line south of the Missouri. Except for the El Paso route of the Texas & Pacific, he accomplished this program in less than a twelve-month period. Where railroads in the Missouri Valley had failed to develop a through route to the Rio Grande and the Gulf Coast, Gould had succeeded. Similarly, where Texas roads had failed to develop routes to the Missouri Valley, Gould had also succeeded.

By the end of 1881, the Gould southwestern system took on definite outlines. It consisted of one east-west line and three major north-south lines. The former extended from Texarkana to El Paso. Of the north-south lines, one extended from New Orleans to St. Louis, consisting of the Texas & Pacific to Texarkana and the Iron Mountain beyond. The other was represented by the International from Houston to north Texas and to a junction with the Texas & Pacific. The third extended from Laredo on the Rio Grande, north over the International and beyond via the Kansas & Texas to the upper Mississippi River gateways.

The completion of these north-south routes after years of delay produced a decided impression on the railroad strategy in this vast area. Previous to the Gould invasion the traffic interchange between the Missouri Valley and Texas, Arkansas and Louisiana had been well stabilized. The northern roads in St. Louis and Kansas City traded their southbound business with noncompetitive connections—the Iron Mountain and the Kansas & Texas. And the southern roads terminating in north Texas exchanged their northbound business with the same lines. There was thus a mutuality of business interests. The two northern lines frequently threatened to build south and the Texas lines north, but neither followed their threats with action. Gould suddenly appeared and did both, thereby seizing control of the through routes between the south and the north. Gould thus cut off his northern competitors from a southern outlet and his southern competitors from a northern outlet. The Alton, the Burlington, the Frisco, and the Atchison lost their independent connections to the south, and could now reach western Louisiana, Arkansas, and the eastern section of Texas only over Gould lines.

The transformation in railroad strategy was important to the northern trunk lines; but to the southern lines—competitors of the Gould roads—the effect was even more momentous. The northern roads had an abundance of traffic in their own territory that did not compete with the Gould lines. If Gould discriminated against their southbound traffic, they had means of retaliation. The southern lines however were not so strong. Their through traffic was largely competitive with the Gould lines. Their only effective weapon was a price war. The Houston & Texas Central[^1] and the Gulf, Colorado & Santa Fe[^2] were the major southern roads whose connections to the north were cut off. Both roads extended from the Gulf Coast to northern Texas. The Gould lines were therefore their competitors as well as their connections. The Gould Texas lines on movements beyond their termini could offer better service if the traffic were handled over their lines instead of over non-Gould roads.

It was imperative, therefore, that the latter open up independent connections. The two roads unfortunately competed with each other for local movements between north and south Texas points, and they could not, therefore, sink their differences to face the common enemy. In the summer of 1882 the Gulf decided to move alone. Its officers proposed to the Alton that if it built south from Kansas City to the Indian Territory, the Gulf would build north from Fort Worth. Both roads would then jointly build a line across the area.[^3] The Alton management, however, was in no expansive mood, and the negotiations proved fruitless. The officers of the Gulf also talked with the Burlington management about building a line in the Indian Territory.[^4]

While aid from these sources was not forthcoming, relief suddenly appeared from an unexpected source. South and west of the southern end of the Iron Mountain was a small line with a heavy cotton traffic that served as a lucrative feeder to the Iron Mountain. Hardly had Gould acquired the Iron Mountain, than this feeder, the Texas & St. Louis, decided upon a program of expansion. Early in 1881 it planned to move west to Dallas and Fort Worth, south to Waco and beyond to the Rio Grande, and north and east to Cairo, Illinois, and by traffic arrangements with the Illinois Central to Chicago.

Gould fought the new road aggressively. In order to break up the projected route to the north, he endeavored to acquire control of the Gulf—an essential link. The road was conservatively financed. Because of its light debts its stock was valuable. It was therefore not possible for Gould to buy control at a low price. The stock was owned by merchants and moneyed men of Galveston.[^5] The management showed the same ability to handle its own affairs and to ignore the Gould technique of threats that Perkins had displayed on behalf of the Burlington. When necessary to cut rates to meet Gould's moves, it did not hesitate. When Gould leveled his threats of parallel construction, it did not shiver as did Vanderbilt. From the very beginning Gould refused to co-operate with the Gulf. He controlled its northern and eastern outlets, and his refusal to honor tickets sold by the Gulf inconvenienced the public and impaired its earnings. The Gulf replied in kind and refused to honor tickets sold by the Gould lines. Tactics of this kind finally led early in 1882 to a general rate war.

The war involved Gould's main routes through this area—the International and the Texas & Pacific. In May the managers of the contestants met and established a pooling arrangement. The rate war was over, or so it seemed. The Gulf, however, remained adamant, and refused to accept its allotment of traffic. It did 75 per cent of the business out of Galveston and purposed to get all of it.

Far from entering into peaceful arrangements with the Gould lines, the Gulf announced another expansion plan. Gould had refused to accommodate the Gulf's through business, believing perhaps that this pressure would depress the market value of the stock. Instead of surrendering or compromising, the Gulf's management seized the offensive. With renewed determination it decided to build an extension through the Indian Territory, this time to a connection with the Frisco.

Rather than invite a competitor into Kansas & Texas territory, Gould thought it better to give way. He was now making concessions, but the concessions came too late. His patience in awaiting a suitable opportunity to buy a desirable property at a low price did not in this case succeed.

In the spring of 1886 the Gulf stockholders finally sold—but not to Gould. They delivered their stock to the Atchison on a stock exchange basis. Gould was thus confronted with powerful competition on the business moving from the Southwest to Kansas City and points east. This transaction gave a strong competitor of the Missouri Pacific in southern Kansas an entrance into Texas. The through line thus created built up a competitive route which surrounded the Missouri Pacific system at numerous points on the south and west. It was a development, the first of a number that in time was to break the Gould monopoly on business between Texas, Oklahoma, and the Missouri Valley.

Neither was Gould able to seize control of the other north-and-south connection of the competitive through route. A large part of the stock of the Houston was closely held. Huntington, as part of his expansion rampage, early acquired control of the road. It appeared that he might even build to St. Louis and thus challenge Gould in the very heart of his system. Huntington however had overextended himself. The panic of 1884 brought on a personal crisis and he was soon forced to relinquish some of his properties. The Houston, however, despite a spectacular battle remained in control of his Southern Pacific system.

If Huntington by acquiring the Houston upset Gould's plans on one part of his system, he delivered a smashing blow on another. Gould's Texas & Pacific had at great speed pushed through the construction of the Rio Grande division, and in order to avoid a battle with Huntington had concluded an agreement designed to regulate the traffic interchange with the Huntington road at El Paso. Huntington soon decided that it was to his benefit to send eastbound traffic over his south Texas line rather than over the Texas & Pacific—the El Paso agreement to the contrary notwithstanding. Gould fumed but did nothing. He had exhausted his ammunition in the Southwest. His properties were in poor physical and financial condition, and Huntington knew it. While the traffic of the Texas & Pacific lagged, that of the Southern Pacific mounted.[^6] The Texas & Pacific's El Paso line was virtually a stub, and since its local traffic was light, the line soon became a financial derelict.

For a time Gould thought of expanding into the Southeast. The most convenient stepping stone would be Memphis, Tennessee. Gould's Iron Mountain skirted the city some miles to the west but did not reach it. A small independent east-west property, the Memphis & Little Rock, connected the Iron Mountain with Memphis. Gould's program to bring that line into his southwestern system produced a sensational succession of lawsuits.

The Memphis & Little Rock had long competed with the Iron Mountain, and rate wars had sapped the earnings of both properties.[^7] Gould decided to get control and to eliminate this competition. In conjunction with Sage, and also with Marquand, his new southwestern associate, he bought over 90 per cent of the stock, for which he paid a high price. The bonds of the reorganized road carried an interest rate beginning July 1, 1882, of 8 per cent. This interest rate, thought Gould, was too high. He cast about for ways and means to accomplish a reduction, and thus make his stock more valuable. He soon devised a plan. The state of Arkansas in March, 1882, had secured a judgment against the road on an old claim. The first mortgage bondholders paid the judgment and secured an assignment of the claim. They then applied for the appointment of a receiver and, had they been successful, the stock for which Gould had paid a good price would have lost most of its value. Gould was prepared. Before receivership proceedings became effective the road confessed judgment on a small note to Sage. The bondholders had never heard of the note, judgment having been confessed only four days after the note was given. The Gould clique got in first, and the court appointed a receiver friendly to it and unfriendly to the bondholders.

Gould then made a bold stroke. He entered suit challenging the validity of the mortgage and asked the court to annul the bonds. He questioned the right of a corporation which had purchased a property to mortgage the very property acquired in order to obtain the purchase price. If the mortgage was invalid and the corporation had no equitable title to the property, it would appear to follow that it should return the property to its creditors. This, however, Gould on behalf of the company refused to do.

The attempt on Gould's part to destroy the rights of the creditors and to seize the property without any consideration, led a federal judge to use some vigorous language. "The case is phenomenal," wrote the judge, "in the audacity of the attempt to induce a court in equity to assist a corporation in repudiating its obligations to its creditors, without offering to them the property it acquired by its unauthorized contract with them. . . . Every stockholder of the corporation, when he acquired his stock, took it with notice explicitly embodied in his certificate that his interest as a stockholder was subordinate to the rights of the holders of the mortgage bonds. It is now contended that if there is any obligation on the part of the corporation to pay for the property it purchased it is not to pay what it agreed to, but to pay a less consideration because the property was not worth the price agreed to be paid. The court will not compel the bondholders to enter into any such inquiry."[^8] Though the complaint of Gould was dismissed, more litigation followed.

While these proceedings were making their way through the intricate maze of legal channels, the clique (Gould, Sage, and Marquand) was making threats. If the bondholders of the Little Rock, asserted Sage, would not make a friendly arrangement, then a new line costing only about 50 per cent of the road's first mortgage bonds would be built to Memphis.[^9] The bondholders eventually reorganized the road and secured control, and Gould was compelled to build a duplicate line to Memphis. Despite this and other forays into new territory, Gould exercised considerable restraint in expanding his southwestern system. He used better judgment in managing the strategy of his southwestern system than he had of either the Wabash or the Union Pacific. He was careful to preserve his transregional connections as independent units. His southwestern connections were friends rather than competitors.

The parent company of the southwestern system was the Missouri Pacific, and in all stages of consolidation negotiations its predominant position was controlling. Gould personally owned a large percentage of its stock. By unifying the corporations under his leadership, he controlled the system. In view of the Kansas & Texas lease to the Missouri Pacific, it was not necessary that he personally own many shares of the lessor. So long as the latter continued to pay interest, the Missouri Pacific's control was undisturbed.

With respect to the Texas & Pacific, the case was not so clear. This company was considered more prosperous. It was not described in the 1881 boom market (as had been the Kansas & Texas) as worthless stuff. When the high hopes for the road were blasted by the rush of events in 1883 and 1884, its security holders organized for action. They succeeded in getting two traffic experts to make an investigation of the division of the through rate with the Missouri Pacific, as a result of which the Texas & Pacific obtained a larger percentage of the rate.[^10]

They accomplished little. They were informed investors and thus understood the technique of balance sheets and income statements. Though acquainted with the art of measuring financial results, they had little conception of the nature of railroad traffic, and they almost certainly had no understanding of Gould's methods.

Regardless of the large non-Gould holdings, these two roads were operated as parts of the Gould system and were included in its reports. The first report of the Missouri Pacific system was unintelligible. It was only after the passing of many years that the accounting profession was able to devise principles which made it possible to present truthful reports of a consolidated enterprise where the business of constituent companies was intermingled. Gould had no purpose to serve in presenting clear reports of each part of his system. Since his ownership of the southwestern roads was concentrated largely in Missouri Pacific stock, it was obviously to his interest to reduce the earnings of the other system companies and to increase those of the Missouri Pacific.

The method by which the earnings of the Missouri Pacific were bolstered and those of the Texas & Pacific, the Kansas & Texas, and the International were reduced, can, for the purposes of convenience in discussion, be classified as follows:

1. By overcharging or undercharging of payments for terminal services.
2. By inequitable divisions of through rates for services rendered in moving through traffic over system routes.
3. By shifting of through traffic in such a way as to move it over one part of the system instead of another.
4. By inadequate maintenance in order to provide cash to pay interest, thereby concealing the financial condition of the property.

### 1. Payments for Terminal Services

Under the lease of the Kansas & Texas to the Missouri Pacific, for example, all the terminal charges payable to the Missouri Pacific were "exacted and paid." The Kansas & Texas, on the other hand, originated a large volume of business. The expense of collecting and distributing the traffic was constant. If it moved over the Kansas & Texas exclusively, the road received the full revenue of that haul. In this way it was reimbursed for the heavy outlay in picking up the traffic. If, however, the traffic was delivered to the Missouri Pacific, that road received a large part of the revenue and should have, therefore, reimbursed the Kansas & Texas for its expenses in picking up the business. According to the investigating committee representing the latter's security holders, the Missouri Pacific made no "equitable allowance."[^11]

### 2. Division of Through Rates

The Missouri Pacific shipped traffic eastward to St. Louis and beyond over the Wabash long haul to Toledo. On a typical movement the Missouri Pacific hauled grain 200 miles, and the Wabash more than 400 miles. On one such shipment it received twenty-five cents per hundred pounds, and the Wabash received ten cents.[^12] It is obvious that the Missouri Pacific received more and the Wabash less than each deserved. Or, to take another illustration, Texarkana was a point of interchange between the Iron Mountain and the Texas & Pacific. The Iron Mountain, with a haul of 490 miles, received more than 70 per cent, and the Texas & Pacific with a haul of 1,487 miles, received less than 30 per cent of the gross. A large increase in the division of the through rate to the Iron Mountain occurred in 1883, and was due to a change in the basis for dividing the rate made by the Missouri Pacific without the authority of the Texas & Pacific board. Had the old basis remained in force, then, according to a well-informed critic of the Gould management, the Texas & Pacific in 1885 and 1886 would have been "in sound financial condition."[^13] Gould flatly denied these charges.

### 3. The System Shifting of Through Traffic

The International originated traffic in Texas which could be sent north and east over either the Kansas & Texas or the Iron Mountain. Most of the traffic, according to the former's investigating committee, was sent via the Iron Mountain. In 1887 the Kansas & Texas, for example (it was estimated), was "wrongfully deprived of at least $1,000,000 through manipulation of the traffic in favor of the Missouri Pacific Company."[^14]

### 4. Low Standards of Maintenance

The evidence on standards of maintenance is conclusive. In 1884 and 1885, while security holders' committees were actively negotiating with Gould, the wretched condition of the Texas & Pacific became clear to all. Contrary to public statements made on behalf of the Gould interests in 1880 and 1881, both the New Orleans and the Rio Grande divisions were built of iron and not of steel rails.[^15] Gould himself stated after the road passed into receivership that the road was laid with iron rails, "and bad ones at that."[^16] In the spring of 1885 passengers on the New Orleans division said that after a ride on the property, they left the trains "feeling black and blue from the effect of being banged about, . . ."[^17] The Kansas & Texas, according to a representative of a trustee of one of its bond issues, was "a physical wreck," and interest was paid from cash that should have been used to improve the property."[^18]

A curious instance of Gould's lack of interest in normal standards of railroad operation is revealed in his reaction to a complaint of a passenger on one of the Texas roads. The president had asked Gould for new equipment, explaining that passenger cars leaked. Gould replied that the trains be run in dry weather only, and suggested that passengers provide themselves with umbrellas.[^19]

Despite these practices, and in the face of vigorous protests against them, Gould in the middle eighties continued to hold his southwestern system intact. The first attack upon it came from the wary holders (largely Philadelphians) of the Texas & Pacific income and land grant bonds. In 1875 as a means of easing its financial position, the company had issued some $8,000,000 of these bonds, and by subsequent proviso, it was authorized if cash was unavailable to pay the interest in scrip. On July 1, 1882, the company defaulted in its cash payments and in July of the year following it also defaulted in the payment of the scrip. Most of the bondholders accepted this double blow with apparent equanimity, and certainly in silence. A few, however, were not disposed to take this beating without a struggle. They consulted counsel and were informed that the failure of the company to pay in scrip automatically entitled them to cash payments. This was more than Gould had bargained for, so he called the board together and decided to pay the interest in scrip. The rebellious bondholders in their turn were now dissatisfied. They entered suit to get their interest in cash, recalling to Gould his frequently reiterated statements that no more scrip would be issued.

The earnings of the property meanwhile declined rapidly. It was not certain that the company would be able to pay the interest on June 1, 1884. Despite the fact that the Missouri Pacific owned none, and Gould but little stock of the Texas & Pacific, its policies were dominated by the Missouri Pacific. The road was managed under an operating contract, the details of which had never been published. It was executed without submission to the Texas road's shareholders or directors. In the middle of May the Missouri Pacific announced that the bond interest due June 1 by the Texas & Pacific would be paid. The latter company, it was stated further, had no floating debt. The interest was paid not, however, by the Texas & Pacific but by the Mercantile Trust from funds advanced by the Missouri Pacific. The trust company instead of destroying the coupons surrendered them to the Missouri Pacific which, in turn, held them as security for advances to the Texas & Pacific. The latter had fulfilled its obligation to its bondholders, and the bondholders therefore had no further claim. It had not, however, fulfilled its obligation to the holder of its bond coupons—the Missouri Pacific—and that road consequently did have a claim against the Texas & Pacific. As a holder of the coupons, it could apply for a receiver. The bondholders had no claim and could not apply for a receiver. Here was another financial device which produced consternation in the ranks of the bondholders.

Gould tried to belittle the affair. It was not a new idea, he said. Other roads had done the same. Drexel & Company, for example, had bought the coupons of the Reading.[^20] Neither was it anything new, he emphasized, in the relations between the two roads; it had been done two or three times before.[^21] Gould could have said that the practice went back even further. Early in 1882, Marquand, the president of the Memphis & Little Rock and representative of the Gould interests, had adopted the practice. The scheme subordinated the rights of the bondholder to the interests of the controlling group. It was one of the many financial devices introduced into American corporate life designed to retain corporate control. This particular one put Gould ahead of the mortgage bondholder. An influential foreign observer described the device as a serious blow at the integrity of the mortgage bond.[^22]

The purchase of the coupons of the Texas & Pacific produced a storm of opposition among its bondholders. Before that opposition could be crystallized, however, Gould, anticipating their moves, declared that the coupons would be canceled. In the middle of July a committee appointed by the Texas & Pacific board recommended the funding of the coupons maturing over the next four or five years into new bonds. The bondholders rejected the proposal. By October they succeeded in uniting their ranks and appointed a committee of five to make an investigation and to recommend a policy. The committee was requested to ask for the removal of the Missouri Pacific interests from the board and to insist upon the appointment of new executives.

Gould refused to surrender. Although the road's earnings had declined, it was a property essential to his southwestern system. By excessive division of the through rate and by favorable terminal allowances, the Missouri Pacific probably realized a good return from the business with the Texas & Pacific. Instead of retreating Gould took the offensive and announced that the unpaid Texas & Pacific coupons would remain uncanceled. Negotiations extending over many months followed. It was not until March of 1885 that a settlement permanent in intention but temporary in fact was finally negotiated. Like so many of his arrangements he succeeded only in surrendering advance ground recently occupied, as a means of bringing pressure to bear upon the other side. The compromise plan approved the funding of 50 per cent (Gould some nine months before had proposed 100 per cent) of the maturing coupons of the Rio Grande and of the New Orleans divisions for four years. The security holders' committee had asked Gould for a majority on the board, and for the right to appoint its own vice president and general manager.[^23] Gould gave the committee only as much representation as he himself had. Each side had four members, and Roberts, president of the Pennsylvania, was appointed as a neutral member. Gould had consistently opposed the demand by the committee for an examination of the accounts between the Texas & Pacific and the Missouri Pacific. By controlling and revising the accounts the security holders intended to separate the interests of the two properties and thus to secure an independent management. Gould agreed only to a revision of the amounts; he did not agree to permit this revision to lead to an independent management. He, therefore, retained control of the road.[^24]

The investigating committee, like most such, both public and private, made its recommendations upon the basis of the record. It sought to plug up the holes which had been made by the shrewdness of an able and resourceful individual. The committee, finding that through rates had not been fairly divided, insisted that experts be appointed to examine the through rates between the Texas & Pacific and its connections. The experts recommended that they be adjusted to make them fair. This meant simply that the Texas & Pacific would get more and the Missouri Pacific less than each was then getting. Again, in order to prevent Gould from exploiting the use of bond coupons as collateral for intercompany loans, it was stipulated that the coupons should be held in trust, and not kept alive once they were turned in under the funding agreement.[^25] The adoption of these recommendations did not interfere with Gould. As conditions changed and demanded new remedies, he rose to meet them.

During these months of negotiation, Gould retained his grip on the southwestern roads. Contrary to expectation, he was not handling the Missouri Pacific as he had the other roads. He had decided to become a railroad manager. To accomplish this it was necessary that he retain his majority interest in the Missouri Pacific and control the Kansas & Texas. Though he had faced many problems in controlling the Texas & Pacific, he had few at this time in controlling the other. That road was heavily bonded. Its strength lay largely in its control of local traffic in the Indian Territory. In the seventies and early eighties it had a monopoly of the business. In the middle eighties, competition began to deplete its revenues. First the Frisco and later the Atchison secured franchises and rights of way through the territory. By 1887 the profits of the Kansas & Texas began to drop.

From 1881 to 1885, however, the road remained profitable to the Missouri Pacific system. Its bondholders were watchful and in 1884 they exerted pressure to exact a more equitable division of the through rate. Since the bonds were paying interest, they had no legitimate complaint; but they were sufficiently enterprising to arrange for a committee representing the lessor and the lessee roads. The committee in 1885 secured a slight change in the division of the rate. Three years later another committee expressed in cautious language the belief that the road did not receive "the consideration for origination of business which it might have done had that point been advocated by some representation of a distinctive Missouri Kansas & Texas interest."[^26]

Outside of this futile through-rate investigation, Gould encountered no obstacle in retaining full control of the Kansas & Texas. The road remained an integral part of the system until Gould early in 1888 decided for the time being to surrender it to the receivers. By that time, however, the road was no longer profitable.[^27] While Gould in the early and middle eighties was clear about the Kansas & Texas, he hesitated about the destiny of the Wabash. In 1881 and 1882 he considered selling out his Wabash stock. Its preferred dividend had never been earned, and it is even questionable whether the fixed charges were earned in the boom year of 1881. In that year and in the year following, Gould had rebought some of the stock which he had sold in 1880. His holdings in 1881 and 1882 were probably small. By the spring of 1883, however, he appears to have concluded that the Wabash was essential to the prosperity of the Missouri Pacific. "A year or more ago," he declared at this time, "I had an idea of selling [referring to this Wabash stock], but I have since made up my mind that the Wabash is necessary to the southwestern system."[^28]

By 1883 he perceived that more traffic was moving east—that is over the Wabash—and less south, down the Mississippi. The river route from St. Louis to New Orleans, which he had established with so much optimism in the spring of 1881, was in fact a product of boom times and high railroad rates. By 1883 eastern railroad wars had reduced eastern rates to record low levels. The river route became unprofitable and Gould recognized that an ever-increasing proportion of traffic would move east by rail. With the Wabash he could co-ordinate his operating policies, provide for expeditious terminal handling of the St. Louis-East St. Louis area, and, above all, divide the rates in such a way as to help the Missouri Pacific.

To retain control over the road, it was necessary that he finance the company's deficits, though he was as usual loyally supported by Sage and Dillon. Through the year 1882 and the early months of 1883, the Wabash, in order to finance current needs, sold commercial paper bearing the endorsements of Gould, Sage, and Dillon to recognized commercial paper houses.[^29] The financial load of the Wabash, however, was growing too heavy even for Gould and his associates to carry. The road, Gould said in the fall of 1882, requires "more care than I bargained for; but I mean to do the best I can for it and work it out."[^30] Since the road was heavily mortgaged, it could sell no more bonds. In addition to divisional liens and a large general mortgage, it had also issued car trust obligations. It was therefore necessary to develop a financial scheme which would enhance its credit standing without at the same time unconditionally engaging the earnings of the Missouri Pacific in its rescue. The Wabash at a secret meeting adopted a resolution authorizing the issue of $10,000,000 6 per cent collateral bonds. The bonds were issued under mysterious circumstances. Gould in a circular, personally signed, declared that $4,000,000 would be used to pay the car trust obligations, and another part sold to liquidate the floating debt. The bonds would be guaranteed by the Iron Mountain. With this guarantee, Gould anticipated little difficulty in selling the bonds. They would be secured, he said, by $18,000,000 of collateral. The public had never heard of these assets. The annual report, issued some weeks later, first identified them, and they were found to be largely unmarketable. One report, characterized by an observer as an "astonishing story," declared that the Iron Mountain had bought all the bonds at fifty cents on the dollar, and that the Wabash used the proceeds to pay Gould and Sage advances. This story was denied only to be followed by another which credited a Philadelphia banking firm with the purchase of the bonds at ninety.[^31]

Gould created a good publicity build-up for the bonds. He stated that he was the largest stockholder of the Wabash. This was correct, for in the spring of the year he had bought large amounts of Wabash stock at prevailing low prices. He also announced that he had bought some of the bonds. This he said should be sufficient answer "to the malicious and unfounded reports recently circulated."[^32] The bonds nevertheless did not sell.

In order to protect the Iron Mountain in its guarantee of Wabash securities, Gould had the Wabash execute secretly a new general mortgage of all its properties in favor of the Iron Mountain. The mortgage was not recorded at the time. Only on the eve of receivership was it recorded and its existence made known. In this way, and others to be described hereafter,[^33] Gould laid his plans in advance with the purpose of perpetuating his control over the Wabash—receivership or no receivership—or, to adapt Mussolini's remarks about the League of Nations prior to his campaign for the conquest of Ethiopia, with receivership, without receivership, or against receivership.

Despite all these critical problems and the rate wars of 1884, Gould held his southwestern system intact. Through the panic of 1884 in the midst of a heavy load of personal obligations, when for a time it seemed he was about to collapse, he succeeded in maintaining his through southwestern routes, rates and divisions. The Missouri Pacific controlled the system, and Gould by majority stockholdings continued to control that road. He controlled the Texas & Pacific and the Wabash by minority holdings. Neither security holders nor judges, neither business reverses nor market fluctuations, neither receiverships nor reorganizations broke his grip on these properties.

---

## Notes for Chapter XX

[^1]: Known hereafter as the Houston.
[^2]: Known hereafter as the Gulf.
[^3]: Chicago Times, May 24, 1882.
[^4]: Burlington archives. Potter to A. E. Touzalin, May 18, 1882.
[^5]: Ibid.
[^6]: Some details on the rise in Southern Pacific traffic are given in Ry. Review, May 16, 1882, 254, citing a compilation of a Pacific Coast journal.
[^7]: See, for example, Public, July 27, 1877, 57.
[^8]: R. R. Gaz., Feb. 15, 1884, 138.
[^9]: The story of this transaction may be followed in ibid., various issues between 1882 and 1887; see also New York Tribune, June 29, 1882; April 14, 1884; April 15, 1884; New York Times, Feb. 12, 1884; Feb. 17, 1884.
[^10]: Statement of the Receiver, Texas & Pacific, before the Subcommittee on Labor Troubles in the South and West, Report No. 4174, House of Representatives, 49th Congress, 2nd Session, May 5, 1886, Part 2, 185.
[^11]: The report of the investigating committee is in Chion., Sept. 1, 1888, 257-60.
[^12]: New York Times, April 26, 1885.
[^13]: This point is made in Henry Clews's Weekly Financial Circular, July 15, 1886. This circular was issued by a banking firm which in its clients' interests closely followed the activities of Gould's southwestern roads.
[^14]: Chron., March 24, 1888, 371.
[^15]: Ry. World, Oct. 15, 1887, 998.
[^16]: Phila. Press, June 4, 1886.
[^17]: Ibid., March 9, 1885, from its New York correspondent who credits these remarks to a passenger.
[^18]: This statement was made by Wheeler H. Peckham, counsel for Union Trust Company, according to the New York Times, Sept. 27, 1888; and New York Tribune, Sept. 27, 1888.
[^19]: S. G. Reed, A History of Texas Railroads, 355; St. Clair Publishing, Houston, 1941.
[^20]: Chron., June 7, 1884, 680.
[^21]: Phila. North American, June 6, 1884.
[^22]: London Economist, Jan. 31, 1885, 133.
[^23]: Phila. Press, Nov. 19, 1884.
[^24]: On the development of these plans between June 1884 and March 1885, see Chron., June 7, 1884, 680; July 26, 1884, 97; Nov. 29, 1884, 607; Bradstreet, March 7, 1885, 151; Ry. World, March 7, 1885, 224.
[^25]: R. R. Gaz., Nov. 28, 1884, 860; Dec. 19, 1884, 908.
[^26]: Chron., Sept. 1, 1888, 257.
[^27]: For details see Chap. XXVII, pp. 538-41.
[^28]: Phila. Press, May 18, 1883.
[^29]: R. R. Gaz., Dec. 1, 1882, 744; New York Times, Jan. 20, 1884, declared that it was a "fact well known" . . . that Gould had endorsed Wabash paper for a long period.
[^30]: Phila. Press, Oct. 30, 1882.
[^31]: Good accounts of the issue of these bonds are found in Bradstreet, April 21, 1883, 248; April 28, 1883, 264.
[^32]: R. R. Gaz., April 27, 1883, 274.
[^33]: See Chapter XXI, pp. 414-7.