## Chapter XXI - Gould's Empire Crumbles

The system which Gould controlled in 1881 extended from Boston to Ogden, Utah. To retain control of all the roads would require sums which were not at his disposal. Control implies the ability to influence corporate policies. A management may have little or no stock in a company, but if the shareholders have confidence in the company's management, they will deliver their proxies to the officials and permit them to determine the destinies of the enterprise. Control, furthermore, is not based on membership on the board of directors. Gould for some years was on the Northwestern, Frisco, and the Rock Island boards. On none of these boards did he accomplish anything useful in behalf of his railroad interests.

Gould lost control of a property only when his opponents eliminated him from company management. Loss of control involved change of executives and a reversal of corporate policies. His dominance of his railroad empire was as temporary in its term as it was rapid in its establishment. It was no sooner completed with the acquisition of the New England late in 1881 than the process of liquidation began. First was the loss of the Central of New Jersey. Gould's interest in the affairs of another eastern railroad was also short-lived. He had entered upon control of the New England amidst a great acclaim. Although he had said little publicly, the president and some board members had spoken glowingly of the potential increase in traffic. Their expectations arising from the affiliation of the property with the Gould system were, surprisingly enough, borne out by results. By the end of the first year of Gould control, the through business was indeed so heavy that it interfered with local passenger and freight trains, and for a time in 1882 an average of 300 cars of through freight daily was refused.[^1] At the road's annual meeting in December of that year when Gould and Roberts of the Pennsylvania were elected to the board, the directors in order to handle the business proposed to add more double track.

This heavy through traffic fitted in well with Gould's other plans. He moved the business at reduced rates over routes consisting of the Wabash, Grand Trunk, Lackawanna, Erie, and the New England. Even though neither the Erie nor the Grand Trunk was under his influence or control, he could make contracts with both for the movement of business at low rates because of the roads he did control. Since both were weak roads their standard of service was lower than that offered by their competitors, and only by quoting lower rates could they secure more traffic. Just as it had been the fate of Gould to learn by experience that local traffic was the core of railroad earnings, so it was necessary for the management of the New England to learn by the same cruel test that through traffic was not necessarily profitable traffic.

If they were not disillusioned by the end of the first year of Gould control, they were certainly disheartened and appalled by the end of the second. The price of the stock which had advanced to 84, when Gould acquired control, had dropped to less than 20. Not until publication of the annual report did they learn definitely that more business at lower rates spelled only disaster. In 1883 traffic increased, but most of the increase was received from connections. The rates on this business were so low and the cost of movement so high that, according to the receiver, the road had to spend about $225 in order to carry an increased gross of $100.[^2] In liquidating his stock Gould turned trader. To sell he decided first to buy, thereby pushing the price higher. When in the middle of October the New England's unfavorable report for the preceding year was published and showed a deficit after fixed charges, the price of the stock went up instead of down. To facilitate the purchase of more stock at low prices, Gould sent a publicity agent to Boston to attack the road's policies. The price of the stock declined and Gould bought to secure a low average book cost. Before the end of the year the stock rose to 37 and he sold out.[^3]

At the annual election in December, 1883, Gould, notwithstanding, was re-elected to the board. The company was then in a financially desperate position. It had incurred a heavy floating debt of about $2,000,000 and had sold second mortgage bonds to finance a program of betterments. When Gould was asked to make loans to the company, he blandly suggested that it be placed in receivership. Such a proceeding, he declared, would lead to an advance in the price of the stock. It is on record that one wealthy investor even took Gould's line of reasoning seriously. "Why," this person wrote in a communication to a New York paper, "who ever heard of a corporation being placed in the hands of a receiver in order that it might advance the price of the stock."[^4] Gould had no further interest in the road. He resigned his directorship, retired from the exercise of any controlling influence in the property, and, according to one commentator, wished the management a Happy New Year.[^5] And thus ended Gould's connection with his second eastern railroad property.

Even though Gould had thus trimmed his empire in the East, he retained his interest in the Lackawanna, although in the strict sense of the word he never did control the road. From time to time he was able to carry through his policies, especially in the course of the rate wars in 1883 and early 1884. Yet Sloan, the president, was at all times the active manager and controlling influence in the road's affairs.

Gould's influence in the properties west and south of Toledo in 1883 and early in 1884 remained dominant. In the Wabash he had a large block of common stock, bought in March and April of 1883, in order to facilitate the lease to the Iron Mountain. He controlled the Missouri Pacific by stock ownership, and including the shares owned by Sage, Marquand and a number of his other associates, could vote a large majority. Ownership and management of this road were in the same hands. In the third property, the Texas & Pacific, neither the Missouri Pacific nor Gould owned much stock. Neither did Gould have any substantial interest in the securities of the Kansas & Texas. Despite his nominal interest in the securities of these roads, his control of their policies was not seriously challenged. His fifth major property was the Union Pacific in which by 1884 he had been the dominating factor for a period longer than in any other road.

In 1884 these five roads appeared to be essential parts of a unified railroad system. The Wabash, the Missouri Pacific route from St. Louis to Kansas City, and the Union Pacific from Kansas City and Omaha to Ogden appeared to form a natural through route. Gould tried to direct traffic along the Kansas City route and away from that formed by the Union Pacific at Omaha with connections which competed with the Missouri Pacific and Wabash. His efforts to divert traffic to the latter roads led to the fateful decision by the Burlington to extend its line to Denver. The Union Pacific despite the damage inflicted by this Gould-stimulated Burlington extension remained a close ally of Gould's roads.

The Wabash and Missouri Pacific continued to control the St. Louis terminal facilities. The Wabash, like the New England, was a victim of an excessive reliance upon through traffic and, more than any other eastern trunk line, was severely punished by the rate wars of the eighties. In 1882 and 1883 the road maintained a showing of earnings by reduction in the standard of maintenance and by charging operating expenses to capital account. As its condition became a matter of general knowledge, the securities were pressed on the market, and in the opening weeks of 1884 the stock dropped to below $20 a share. Gould, at that time a large stockholder as well as the holder of its commercial paper, insisted that "its financial condition [was] good and the property intact."[^6]

Early in 1883 through the Iron Mountain lease, he had already revealed his determination to retain his hold on the road. Its financial burdens were, however, becoming ever more pressing, and the obligations he and his associates had assumed ever more heavy. By the middle of May he faced the most desperate financial crisis in his business career. Sage for the first time in many years was also in trouble and for a time was unable promptly to meet all of his obligations. Both men therefore found it impossible to finance further the deficits of the Wabash. In the middle of April the board met. There was a full attendance; the meeting was a prolonged one and in response to a request for information, the secretary declared that the meeting was of no public interest, that a receivership was not considered, and that no attention had been given to the payment of interest due June 1. Yet considerable doubt was expressed that the interest would be paid.[^7]

Fears of receivership were frequently expressed, though officials and others close to Gould insisted that a receivership was neither possible nor advisable. Humphreys, formerly president, declared that he had sold no Wabash stocks or bonds himself and advised his friends not to do so.[^8] Connor, Gould's brokerage partner, who probably saved him from insolvency in the critical days of May, 1884, announced there was no foundation for such rumors. "How," declared Connor, "can such an application [for receivership] be made? The road has paid its interest so far, and not being in default, no such step could be taken.... It is all stuff."[^9] With this view that receivership was legally impossible many agreed since under the lease to the Iron Mountain a default must have lasted for six months before it could be canceled and a receivership requested. Finally Gould himself on the very eve of the receivership declared that reports of such an impending proceeding were "all folly... we have paid all interest on its bonds so far, and I know of no cause why we should not continue doing so in the future."[^10]

If these remarks were made for the purpose of influencing Wabash stock, they were made in vain. Gould and his associates were no longer able to raise the funds to meet the road's pressing requirements. Suspension of interest payments on June 1 would eventually lead to receivership. Despite its financial weakness the road was essential to Gould, and a receivership might lead to its loss. The arch-enemy of Gould among the metropolitan dailies asserted that if the general mortgage bondholders and preferred stockholders of the Wabash would now unite, they could take control away from Gould.[^11]

The Gould critics hailed with delight and perhaps with a sense of relief the declaration of the Wabash receivership at the end of May. It seemed that the Gould system had received a body blow. On the face of things it looked as though the holders of general mortgage bonds, most of whom were English citizens, supported and led by experienced financial personnel, could take control and eliminate Gould from the property in which they had invested so much and Gould so little.

Again, as so many times before, the Gould opponents underestimated his resourcefulness. Despite his preoccupation with such a variety of pressing affairs in April and May, he found the time to work out a program designed to transfer the jurisdiction of the road to the hands of the court, and at the same time prevent the security holders from seizing control. He first relieved the solvent Iron Mountain, the guarantor of the Wabash obligations under the lease, from any liability. Under the lease contract the guarantor could default in interest without confessing insolvency, because it had agreed to pay interest only out of the lessor's earnings. Late in May the lessee-guarantor announced that the earnings of the lessor were insufficient to pay interest. The Iron Mountain and hence the Missouri Pacific were saved from loss.

Gould's next problem was to save himself from liability. The Wabash had a floating debt of about $2,000,000 for supplies, unpaid wages and taxes. More important to Gould, however, was the fact that the Wabash had promissory notes in the amount of about $2,300,000, some of which matured late in May and others in June. They were endorsed by Gould, Sage, Dillon, and Humphreys. If called upon, the latter two would probably be unable to meet their obligations as endorsers. Gould and Sage knew that if the Wabash did not pay these notes at maturity they would have to pay. To Gould this additional obligation in the critical days of late May and early June would have been dangerous, if not fatal.

Gould, strangely enough, in an effort to seek a way out of this crisis sought a Wabash receivership. A receiver could subordinate existing debts to a new debt called receiver's certificates which could be issued by the receiver to raise cash to pay the maturing notes. If a receiver was to be appointed there was, however, no time to lose. A few days after the denials of receivership and defaults, the Wabash executive committee met and resolved to apply for a receivership. After a nine-day search an acceptable judge was found—Judge Brewer of the Kansas Circuit. Another difficulty was now presented. Creditors generally applied to the courts for a receiver; but the road's creditors, as the Gould apologists pointed out, had no rights in court. The Wabash had paid its interest. Even if a default did occur, under the lease a six months' grace was allowed before a receiver could be appointed. Gould was also equal to this situation. If there was no creditor ready to ask for a receivership, Gould on behalf of the Wabash was ready, and so the Wabash made the application. On May 30, in an ex parte proceeding and with no notice to any interested party, the application was granted, and Humphreys and Thomas E. Tutt—Wabash stockholders—were appointed receivers. The court's action on the application of the corporate mortgagor was a record-shattering precedent. For years to come the question was destined to be discussed, argued and reargued. The problem finally came to the United States Supreme Court, and Chief Justice Fuller conceded that the bill placing the Wabash in receivership on application by its own counsel was "without precedent"; and that "the concession to a mortgagor company of the power through its own act to displace vested liens by unsecured claims [is] dangerous in the extreme."[^12]

This language was expressed years later and obviously exerted no influence on Gould's policies. Gould took immediate advantage of the receivership to solve his own financial problems. On the very day that the court acted, application was made and granted to sell receiver's certificates to raise funds to pay the maturing notes endorsed by Gould and his co-endorsers. So ingratiating was the court, that in order to avoid the "personal inconvenience and injury" that might result from publicity, the names of Gould, Sage, and Dillon as endorsers were not made public.[^13] Thus through court courtesy, Gould's obligation as endorser of the bankrupt Wabash notes was concealed from his creditors.

To the public, uninitiated in the significance of these legal technicalities, Gould's control of the road was over. Critics and investors in expressing this opinion were, however, jumping to conclusions. It was not until the end of June that they came to realize the full possibilities of Gould's actions. The bitter daily critic denounced the receivership as another Gould trick, quite worthy of his genius. Gould, it was contended, was trying to set aside the lien of the general mortgage. If he succeeded, the public could well believe that there was less security in a mortgage bond on a Gould road than there was in a floating debt, especially if Gould happened to hold the floating debt.[^14] This observation was correct. The floating debt of the Wabash was superior to the lien of the bondholders, and Gould had set a precedent which for many a year was to plague mortgage bondholders. While the latter received no interest, to say nothing of principal, Gould and his friends became the fairy godchildren of the judiciary.

Security holders now began to recognize that the Wabash in receivership was as effectively under Gould's control as out of receivership. The reaction on English financial opinion was even more severe than it had been fifteen years before in connection with the Erie. In the use of strong language and outspoken denunciation of his work, the remarks of an informed English journal were unprecedented. Said this writer: "There are few frauds on earth so black as that which is associated with the name Wabash, and few men, we are pleased to say, so black as Mr. Gould himself, the president of this wretched swindle."

Gould, furthermore, declared this same writer in a spirit of unrestrained condemnation, was "indeed, the imperial Autolycus of the Western World.... Like the Ishmaelite of old, his hand is against every man, and every man's hand is against him.... But to attempt to sketch the character of Mr. Jay Gould in its true colors would be futile, since no language is equal to the task...."

And as a final blast, in referring to his public statements during the previous two years that the Wabash would eventually resume preferred dividends as contrasted with the sworn testimony of Hopkins (an operating official) in petition for receivership, that the road had not earned its operating expenses for two years, it declared that Gould "would seem to have been roundly lying all through the peace in order to successfully pioneer one of the most disgusting, barefaced swindles on record."[^15]

On this side of the water the Wabash receivership was also condemned. A leading weekly financial journal unleashed a strong attack upon Gould's policies. This paper in 1879 and 1880 had seen little to criticize. In 1884, after the debacle, and with a beautiful sense of hindsight philosophy, it delivered an amazing castigation. It described the history of the Wabash under Gould control as "one of the most remarkable and interesting that [had] ever occurred in American railroading. It [was] even phenomenal, embracing in a comparatively short period nearly every phase of kite-flying, watering, stock jobbing, bankruptcy of the company and assessment of stockholders."[^16] This critic and many others did not fully comprehend the situation. They seemed to believe that Gould was anxious only to recover his investment in the Wabash at the expense of bondholders and stockholders. They believed that the Wabash as part of the Gould empire was a thing of the past, and that it was on its way out. The critics were soon to be undeceived.

The Wabash receivership was by no means the only Gould exploit in the stirring days of May and June, 1884. Gould was threatened not only on the east but also on the far west of his far-flung system. There the Union Pacific had displayed a magnificent record. Investors with their eye on the past had found an ideal investment. In the midst of the depression of the seventies, its stock passed from a nondividend-payer to a 6 per cent payer, and after the merger of 1880 the dividend was continued.

Meanwhile the road's expansion policy was financed by a continuous succession of bond issues. These debts produced a heavy burden of fixed charges. Its strength was further impaired by the rise of competition from other roads. The rate structure of the Union Pacific accordingly weakened, and the ton-mile rate dropped. In 1883 and 1884 the earnings upon any sound basis of accounting would have reflected a decline sufficiently serious to warn the investing public. In the absence of supervised statements by a public authority, Gould was free to use his genius for misleading accounting methods. Dillon must have been impressed by Gould bookkeeping, for, when in 1884 the company passed the dividend, he belittled the significance of the event. It was, he said, "mainly a matter of bookkeeping."[^17]

Even so informed a student of Gould's career as Adams was oblivious to the financial effect of these policies. It was not until after he had assumed the presidency that Adams recognized the nature of Gould's bookkeeping and denounced the road's earnings report issued in 1883. "They were deceptive," he said, "they misled me and a good many others, because a change in the methods of bookkeeping made the comparisons with the previous year utterly valueless. These approximate statements were a fraud—that is, owing to the change in bookkeeping."[^18]

Yet in 1882 and 1883 when the silent but informed businessman-investor, the man who thinks much and talks little, was selling his stock, Adams recommended the stock for purchase.[^19] In so doing, Adams apparently did not consider the operations of the Thurman Act of 1878. The law required the Union Pacific, as one of the subsidized roads, to set aside for the purpose of paying the government bonds advanced to aid in construction of the road, 25 per cent of its net income and all of its gross revenue derived from the movement of government traffic. On various pretexts Gould as the controlling power had not set these sums aside. There was nothing secret about the law nor about the views of the Union Pacific concerning the law. The obligation was there and eventually would have to be met. Perhaps Adams never gave the matter a second thought. There is no evidence that in approving the stock as a conservative investment, he made any reference to his potential liability. *Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?* (Who will guard the guards themselves?)

This failure to heed the dictates of the Thurman Act brought the road's affairs to a climax. Early in 1884 the stock was still selling at about 80. Early in April the report spread that Congress was about to enforce the Thurman Act and to compel the Union Pacific to make its payment into the sinking fund. On the basis of another report that a House committee would recommend an increase in the contributions from 25 per cent to 37½ per cent, the price of Union Pacific broke sharply.[^20] Before the end of the month the situation in Congress rapidly reached a crisis. The House passed an amendment to the Thurman Act to increase the sinking fund contribution to 55 per cent. The sales of Union Pacific increased, and by the end of the month the price of the stock dropped to nearly $60 a share. In the first week of May the situation grew even more critical. The House bill was referred to the Judiciary Committee of the Senate. There Senator George F. Edmunds, long a critic of the Union Pacific, presented a report asking the president to request the attorney-general to execute the penalties against the road for paying unauthorized dividends, and against any official who had voted for such dividends. The report was turned over to Senator Hoar, and he was asked to bring it before the Senate for a vote on the sixth of May.

The situation now confronting Gould was desperate. He had been an official of the Union Pacific for the period in which the road had paid unauthorized dividends. His personal loans were heavy, and he was beset by a group of traders who were trying to bring about his downfall.[^21] The passage of the bill at this critical period probably would have meant a death blow to Gould. He had bought substantial blocks of Union Pacific at prices slightly below 90, and passage of the law might reduce the stock to nominal values. Penalties, furthermore, would have subjected him to fines sufficiently heavy to induce his creditors to call their loans and insist upon immediate payment.

Gould was again equal to the occasion. The panic did not unnerve his iron courage. He again revealed his mastery of men and once more showed his ability to select the proper man at the proper time to do the job. He understood well the temper of public opinion, and he recognized that the Senate would pay scant attention to his requests. He did not represent any body of public opinion nor could he generalize his personal troubles and financial problems and assert that they were part of a problem of an army of investors.

On the Union Pacific board, however, there was a person well fitted to present the public view and to explain how any measure taken against the Union Pacific would harm the public. That man was Adams. He was a citizen of distinction and with a large following among public-spirited citizens and investors. The board of directors, all of whom were involved, accordingly selected Adams to avert or postpone the introduction of the Edmunds resolution. Adams, in the words of Senator Hoar, was a man "of unimpeachable moral and business character...."[^22] He could not, however, fathom the motives of others. "An entirely honest man himself, morally speaking," wrote Perkins of Adams, "he, nevertheless, suspects everybody less stupid than himself of not being honest."[^23] Adams was the ideal man to convince the Senate that passage of the Edmunds bill would be detrimental to the public welfare. At the "urgent solicitation" of the board he left for Washington. His approaches to Senator Edmunds not being satisfactory, he addressed himself to other members of the committee, finally securing a hearing from Senator Hoar. Adams's arguments followed traditional lines. First was a plea of personal self-defense. He was assured, he said, by directors and officials of the Union Pacific, that the property was all right. His position, he said further, was not enviable. He had endorsed the stock and the company's management. In the country's present critical financial condition, he declared, the passage of the resolution would "destroy the entire value of the stock, create a panic, completely discredit Jay Gould, and bring to ruin" many holders of Union Pacific securities.[^24] The argument of Adams brought some opposition on the floor of the Senate. Senator Van Wyck of Nebraska, for example, remarked sarcastically, that one must speak in bated breath for fear that this institution of credit—the Union Pacific—would tumble, and that care must be taken not to impair the value of its stock on the market.[^25]

Adams's use of the time-worn innocent-investor argument, however, won the day. Senator Hoar agreed, on behalf of the committee, to postpone action to the twentieth of May. Prolonged negotiations followed. The twentieth of May came and passed and no action was taken; but Adams eventually succeeded in making one of the most unusual agreements on record with a representative of a legislative body. With no legal authority, without informing any of the law-enforcing agencies, such as the attorney-general or the Department of Justice, Senator Hoar on behalf of a Senate committee made an agreement with a corporation which was believed to have been violating the law for a period of about six years. The legislative committee approved the agreement; the agreement was designed to enable the railroad to comply with the law, and as carried out made any executive action to enforce compliance with the law unnecessary. A legislative committee, in short, made an arrangement for the enforcement of a law, and thus took over the function of the executive branch of the government.

The arrangement negotiated between Senator Hoar and Adams eliminated Gould and his group from the management of the property. Dillon, his close associate, agreed to resign the presidency. The company agreed to pay no dividends until after Congress met in December, to permit the government to retain the revenue derived from government traffic, and to pay the United States Treasury approximately $700,000 due under the Thurman Act for the year 1883. The agreement of the Union Pacific, which of course was unilateral, since the committee could not pledge either the Senate or the Executive, was submitted to the Judiciary Committee on the seventeenth of June. It was accepted by the committee on that date. The plan was presented to the Union Pacific board the next day and was promptly accepted. The dividend was passed, Dillon resigned, and Adams was elected president. Adams well deserved the title of the Angel of the Union Pacific, although it was not bestowed upon him. Gould was saved. He still had a large block of Union Pacific, and by this extraordinary arrangement with a Senate committee, the way was open for a rising market in Union Pacific stock. The Gould-staged bull market in the two following months was led by that stock.

When Gould, as the dominant factor in the Union Pacific policies departed, the property was in an unenviable condition. It had a volume of unfinished construction work on hand. The Oregon Short Line almost two years in building was still unfinished, and other extensions were in the course of construction. The road's physical condition was poor. Its main lines were almost entirely unballasted, and its equipment largely obsolete. Finances were also poor. Payment of unearned dividends left the company with little cash, and with slight reserves against emergencies. The interest charges on the debts incurred in building many lines had been charged to capital account; they were soon to appear as interest and thus increase the company's heavy fixed charges. The borrowing capacity was almost exhausted; earnings were falling, with the war of rates promising to reduce them further; and the stock dropped to below $30 a share.

Thus did Gould lose a valuable part of his railroad empire of 1881. By the summer of 1884 he had lost all his eastern properties as well as his transcontinental line. Besides the main stem of the combined Missouri Pacific-Iron Mountain system, he was left with only two major roads, the Kansas & Texas, and the Texas & Pacific. His hold on the latter was weakening. In order to maintain his grip, he had in 1884 adopted an ingenious scheme which aroused the bondholders.[^26] Another agreement made in March, 1885,[^27] did not settle fundamental problems. It was difficult for investors to conclude that their optimism in 1880 and 1881 had been unjustified. They believed that the road needed only a respite; and that if given a little leeway, would soon earn enough to pay both interest and dividends.

The plan for readjustment of the road's finances provided little cash to spend on its impoverished property. Gould, however, was not concerned. He held none of the bonds and looked upon his small stock investment from the standpoint of the Missouri Pacific. Even though the financial plan was unsound as a means of restoring the road to financial health, it was sufficiently sound from the standpoint of Gould. On the face of things he held control by the narrowest of margins, since on a vote of the board on a critical issue, he could command only eight out of the seventeen votes. Hence, before the end of 1884, loss of control seemed inevitable. In September a committee of the board went over the line and decided that the road could no longer pay interest, and in December the company went into the hands of a receiver. On taking over the property that official discovered that more than 20 per cent of the rolling stock was unserviceable, that only a few miles were laid with steel track, and that the road needed badly a large number of new ties.[^28]

It appeared that Gould would lose control. Here again, as in the case of the Wabash, external appearances were deceptive, for Gould prior to the receivership had secured a commanding position in the Texas & Pacific. To enable the road to pay interest, the Missouri Pacific had made loans, thereby making itself a floating debt creditor for about $1,250,000.[^29] Repeating the Wabash precedent, Gould used this small debt as a basis for another scheme to acquire control of the property in receivership at an insignificant price.

Of the major properties in his railroad system, there were only two left intact. One was the parent, the solvent Missouri Pacific. The other was the Kansas & Texas leased to the Missouri Pacific. A large block of its stocks and bonds was held in Amsterdam.[^30] The Dutch bondholders were suspicious of Gould's control. Probably impressed by the decline in price of the securities of the Gould roads, they became suspicious of Gould's willingness or ability through the Missouri Pacific to continue the payment of interest on their bonds. They therefore did the unusual. Before any financial difficulties developed, and while the road was still paying interest, they appointed a committee. The committee found no evidence of any unfair arrangement of system traffic or of property undermaintenance. The committee consisted of bankers and brokers, not engineers and operating men. They saw what they were supposed to see and looked only for the obvious. In 1885 Gould thus enjoyed secure control of both the Kansas & Texas and the Missouri Pacific. He appeared to have lost the Union Pacific, the Wabash and the Texas & Pacific. A perennial metropolitan critic, in viewing his system, was impressed by the appalling magnitude of the stocks and bonds issued by his five major properties. This volume of securities, "with but a few exceptional classes of the bonds, are in utter discredit. Not one of these companies," it continued, "can put out a report which commands confidence; some scarcely pretend to give reports; two are bankrupt; a third is not far from it; a fourth is flourishing amid ruin with a fictitious appearance of prosperity, and its stock, while quoted at a high figure in the market, no one dares touch; the fifth, nominally controlled by the government, which built it, had contributed to our history little more than a record of scandals and corruption. Everywhere the lines run, they mark bankruptcy, fraud, deception; there is no sound spot anywhere, because far as they run to north and south and wide as they stretch from east to west, a single hand is over them all, under whose blighting shadow everything rots."[^31] And that hand was the hand of Gould.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXI

1. *Boston Transcript*, cited in *Ry. Review*, Dec. 2, 1882, 687.
2. The annual report is analyzed in *R. R. Gaz.*, Dec. 14, 1883, 830, and the statement of the receiver with respect to the terms on which the road did its through business is in *ibid.*, Feb. 8, 1884, 120.
3. *Boston Transcript*, Jan. 3, 1884, is authority for the statement that Gould sent an agent to Boston for the purpose of attacking the New England.
4. *New York Herald*, Jan. 6, 1884.
5. *Bradstreet*, Jan. 5, 1884, 10.
6. *New York Tribune*, Jan. 18, 1884.
7. *Ry. World*, April 19, 1884, 368.
8. *New York Herald*, April 25, 1884.
9. *New York Times*, May 9, 1884.
10. *New York Mail & Express*, May 12, 1884.
11. *New York Herald*, June 2, 1884.
12. 145 U. S., 95, 6.
13. *Atkins vs. Wabash, Federal Reporter*, Vol. 29, 165, 1886.
14. *New York Herald*, June 23, 1884.
15. These remarks were made by the *London Railway Times*, cited in *ibid.*, July 22, 1884.
16. *Chron.*, Aug. 16, 1884, 183.
17. *Bradstreet*, Oct. 4, 1884, 216.
18. *Ry. Review*, Sept. 6, 1884, 464.
19. Burlington archives, Perkins to Forbes, in a letter dated May 23, 1884, wrote that Adams had induced many people to buy the Union Pacific stock.
20. *New York Herald*, April 3, 1884.
21. See Chapter XXIV, pp. 493-5.
22. *Congressional Record*, June 21, 1884, 5436.
23. Burlington archives, Perkins to Forbes, May 23, 1884.
24. This argument of Adams, including the quotation, is based upon an analysis in the *New York Times*, July 31, 1884; another account appeared in the *New York Tribune*, Dec. 5, 1890.
25. *Congressional Record*, June 21, 1884, 5432.
26. See Chapter XX, pp. 404-5.
27. See *Ibid.*, p. 406.
28. Report No. 4174, House of Representatives, 49th Congress, 2nd Session, Statement of the Receiver, Texas & Pacific, May 5, 1886, before the Subcommittee on Labor Troubles in the South and West, Part 2, 172-3.
29. *Ibid.*, 184.
30. Amsterdam held $18,000,000 of stock out of $46,000,000 outstanding, according to an analysis made by a New York broker, as reported in the *Phila. North American*, Aug. 7, 1884.
31. *New York Times*, Jan. 18, 1885.