## Chapter XXII - Gould's Empire Reorganized

Of the three major railroads which Gould lost in 1884 and 1885, only two were of importance in the building of his southwestern system. He was not interested in the third, although this, the Union Pacific, appears to have been the most important in 1879-81. It was the prospective traffic which it would turn over to the Wabash that seemed at the time to give the latter such a high value. The Union Pacific, however, discovered that it could do little for the Wabash since its own traffic needs allied its fortunes with the direct Omaha-Chicago lines.

It was in the development of the southwestern system that Gould placed more and more of his time, energy and capital. The two roads—the Wabash and the Texas & Pacific—whose control he apparently had lost, were essential to its prosperity. Gould accordingly arranged his affairs in such a way as to enable him at reasonable cost to reacquire control of both of the roads. To achieve this, he was forced to take the leadership in their corporate reorganization and to enter the intricate field of mortgage foreclosures, rearrangement of capital structures, cancellation of corporate leases, and many other financial problems. He was obliged, furthermore, to deal with different classes of security holders; with bankers and brokers, partners of investment houses, presidents of trust companies and railroad companies, not only in this country, but also abroad, especially in England, Germany, and Holland. These men possessed wide experience in financial matters and a thorough understanding of the possibilities. Many also had a strong investor following. Despite all this talent, Gould usually came out the victor. He took an advance position in his efforts to reorganize properties to the point where they could earn fixed charges and become solvent. Because of their realistic thoroughness some of these methods were violently criticized.

Of the two major roads which required financial surgery, the most important both as to size and complexity was the Wabash. Despite its reorganization in the middle seventies its financial structure had not been radically changed. Its property was still covered by separate first mortgages on various parts of its line, to which second mortgages were later added. Under the administration of Gould the company added a large number of feeders and branches, mostly on a lease basis. By 1880 almost every bit of property was covered either by a first mortgage or a rental contract which had the same effect as a mortgage. To these liabilities Gould in 1881 added a general mortgage with a lien on the entire property subject to the existing mortgages. Unlike most instruments of this kind, the lien embraced only the property which was then owned by the company. The securities and the contracts representing the rights of the Wabash to use bridges, tracks, tunnels and terminals were not embraced in the lien of the general mortgage bonds. Without these contracts the Wabash system could not operate.

Evidences of these rights were kept by the Wabash in the treasury. Their existence might, it is true, have been discovered by inquiring observers; inquiring observers, however, are always few. When the Wabash in the spring of 1883 announced its intention to issue collateral trust bonds protected by a portfolio of securities, including contracts conveying title to some of these strategic rights, financial observers were surprised. Gould was not surprised.

Despite his preoccupation with so many critical problems, Gould shortly after the Wabash receivership was ready with a plan of reorganization. The bondholders had hardly grasped the essentials of the problem before Gould was ready with a proposal. His plan was drastic, and to the junior mortgage bondholders, it threatened disaster. He proposed that the general mortgage be foreclosed, and that in exchange for the bonds, the new company issue an equal amount of noncumulative debentures on which no interest be paid unless earned. With Gould's finesse in the art of bookkeeping, investors could look ahead to many years of no income. This was not all. Gould proposed that the stock be assessed $6 a share to raise $3,000,000; with an equal amount to be raised by the sale of debentures. The $6,000,000 or thereabouts thus raised would be used to pay the company's floating debt and to retire the collateral trust bonds pledged as security. The plan would drastically reduce the Wabash's fixed charges.[^1]

It was a good plan for the company, and an even better plan for Gould. The company's notes held by Gould would be paid in cash. While this was an advantage for the Wabash and Gould, it was a devastating blow to the general mortgage bondholders. Gould recognized that the success of the plan depended upon the approval of the English bondholders. Appreciating that his position as the chief executive of the Wabash might interfere with the acceptance of his proposal, he resigned as president. Joy, who stood high in the confidence of British investors, succeeded him.

Shortly after his elevation to the presidency, Joy, accompanied by O. D. Ashley, secretary of the Wabash, left for Europe. Joy was certain that the reorganization plan would be successful. Both he and Gould, however, were soon to be disappointed. In the United States and in England the plan was assailed in inflammable language. In this country a trade journal, which in the few months preceding had gradually changed its attitude toward Gould from one of friendliness to outspoken hostility, attacked the plan violently. "One reads the details of this remarkable plan with a feeling of wonder whether the federal judiciary of the United States is really the law department of Mr. Gould's southwestern railroad system, or whether there is actually any law in the country at all."[^2] A leading English paper remarked that since the new debentures had no proprietary rights, the general mortgage bonds became junior to the collateral trust bonds. In this way Gould and his group would reacquire control—"a monstrous proposal, monstrous in its audacity, and in its unblushing demand for yet more money."[^3] The most revealing criticism came from one who was in a position to appreciate the ingenuity of the author of the plan. This man was a banker—the chairman of the London Wabash Bond and Shareholders Committee—who, on the basis of twenty-five years of experience, declared he was "amazed almost with a feeling of admiration at the prodigious swindle which [had] been perpetrated upon the unfortunate bondholders."[^4] Joy failed to get approval of the plan and within a few weeks returned to the United States. Like other experienced railroad men, he was deeply discouraged. Perkins of the Burlington, for example, observed that the Wabash was "floundering about and trying to make settlement with its creditors and reorganize," though he doubted whether the effort would succeed.[^5]

Gould, meanwhile, busied himself with another aspect of the reorganization. The Wabash leased lines carried little traffic. Gould moved to solve the problem of unprofitable leased lines with complete disregard of corporate amenities. He proposed to the court that the Wabash discontinue immediately the operation of all such lines. After a delay of almost a year, Judge Brewer finally handed down one of those inscrutable decisions which seemed to deny something that, for all practical purposes, it did not deny. Although Gould's request for permission to abandon unprofitable lines was rejected, and although the court declared that it would not sever branches from a railroad system, it nevertheless upheld the right of the lessor or the holder of a mortgage whose rent or interest was unpaid to insist upon repossession or foreclosure. This was not "sloughing off" branches, asserted the court: If disruption did come, it would come to those who have a "legal right" to do so.[^6]

The decision simply transferred the initiative from Gould to the unfortunate security holders. Under this decision, Gould could pass the interest or the rent, and then invite the security holders to repossess their property. During the next two years the creditors of company after company took title to property either by foreclosure or by eviction proceedings. Many of the weak lines which for so many years were to be such disturbing factors in the railway world were born of acquisitions and subsequent reorganizations similar to those of the Wabash.

These problems of public interest were of no concern to Gould any more than they were to corporate reorganizers of later years. They were, however, of great help to the Wabash, since, by permitting the lessor-owners or mortgage creditors to repossess their unprofitable branches, the earnings on the other routes of the system were increased. Before Judge Brewer handed down his decision authorizing the Wabash to adopt this policy, the English and the American bondholders' committee had succeeded after "long and tedious negotiations"[^7] in working out a modified plan of reorganization which the London committee agreed to recommend to its bondholders. The general mortgage bonds, instead of being exchanged for unsecured debentures, would be exchanged dollar for dollar for new mortgage bonds. The interest would be reduced from 6 per cent to 5 per cent, and for five years would be income bonds, the interest on which would not be paid unless earned. The new bonds were made more palatable by getting fair representation on the board of directors. These were insubstantial variations from the original plan. Gould had previously, as in the Texas & Pacific, given representation on the board to the creditors, and he knew from experience that the privilege could have little effect on corporate policy. In this modified plan, he adhered to his major premises: the new junior bonds would pay no interest, and assessments would be levied on the stock sufficient in amount to redeem the floating debt.

It seemed, nevertheless, that Gould's new plan despite the slight changes would succeed. Joy was asked to return to England to secure approval. The bondholders, however, rejected the plan, and in addition decided to appoint an investigating committee. Despite failure, negotiations continued. Within less than three months a third plan emerged. The right of the general mortgage bondholders to secure representation on the board was more clearly defined. One-half of the board would be elected by the bondholders, and the other half by the shareholders. The president of the road would be elected by agreement between the two groups of board members, and failing that, by the trustees of the bondholders. It was still provided that the floating debt should be paid from funds raised by an assessment on the stockholders. It was suddenly discovered that the floating debt had been underestimated by about $900,000. Since the existence of such a large debt would "be fatal" to the success of the plan, the committee suggested that the problem be referred to another committee.[^8]

This committee for the first time discovered the real value of the collateral trust bonds. The pledged securities, it was now recognized, were highly important, and the committee, therefore, raised embarrassing questions regarding their ownership. After hard bargaining it finally succeeded in reaching an agreement that all the securities should be subject to the new general mortgage.[^9]

This was a notable victory for the bondholders. The committee, having tasted blood, now wanted more, and demanded that an investigation of the property be made. Joy deprecated such a move, insisting that if Gould should turn hostile, he could injure the Wabash by diverting the business of the southwestern lines from it to the lines of its competitors.[^10] This threat was typical. It made no impression on the British bondholders who proceeded with their plans and appointed a committee to come to the United States to investigate the road. By this show of firmness the committee made a strong impression on Gould. He was not anxious to divert his business from the Wabash to a competitive line. He continued to negotiate and on the first of September reached an agreement for a new plan. The foreclosure of the two junior mortgages which Gould had originally suggested was included, but the preference in treatment of the collateral trust bondholders over the general bondholders was discarded. Each group would get dollar for dollar in the debentures of the new company. The floating debt would be exchanged in part for a new issue of debentures. The stocks were still to be assessed, and the proceeds used to pay off the balance of the floating debt.

The plan, involving the purchase of the property at foreclosure sale, was to be carried out by a purchasing committee. Joy was appointed chairman. The committee at that time appeared to be unimportant and almost everybody ignored it. This fulfilled Gould's wishes. He had plans and, as the months rolled on in 1885 and well into 1886, he used the purchasing committee to carry out such plans.

Everything was now arranged for the grand climax. Gould, convinced that the path was clear, had declared months before that reorganization was "virtually assured."[^11] The plan, he said, had been accepted by a sufficiently large number of bondholders and stockholders to insure success. On April 26, 1886, the sale of foreclosure was held and the success of the plan seemed assured. Acquisition of the property by the purchasing committee heralded the approaching end of the receivership—an event which was hailed by one railroad periodical as "the closing scene in one of the most complicated reorganization movements ever attempted in this country."[^12]

The other steps necessary to complete the reorganization, said the secretary, would be taken as rapidly as circumstances permitted. The other steps were soon revealed. The senior bondholders—those holding first and second mortgages on the main system line, from Kansas City to St. Louis, and from St. Louis to Chicago and to Toledo—had not participated in the reorganization proceedings. Perhaps they believed that they were not involved in any plans which called for reduction in principal or interest on the part of the junior security holders. They were soon disillusioned. Within less than a month the purchasing committee requested them to make their contribution to the cause. They were asked to reduce their interest rate to 5 per cent and to exchange their overdue coupons for new bonds.

This proposal was submitted in a pamphlet issued by the purchasing committee in which for the first time the traffic realities of the Wabash system were officially presented. The competitive situation of the Wabash was described as critical. The road served a territory which was crossed by every eastern trunk line. "All roads from Chicago to the seaboard, except the Michigan Central," declared the committee, "cross it. All roads from that city southwest, south and southeast cross it, and they radiate from Chicago like the sticks of a fan.... There is no point on its lines not subject to competition as intense as competition can be. There are parallel roads on all sides, and roads crossing it at all points."[^13]

The security holders now knew the worst. Gould, in the hour of desperation, flooded their minds with gloom even as five years before, in the hour of triumph, he had flooded their minds with cheer. They were told, furthermore, that the floating debt had increased about 100 per cent in the two years since the beginning of the receivership. This large debt, according to the committee, had a lien on the property superior to that of the first and second mortgage bondholders.

The first mortgage bondholders learned also that aside from the danger of the floating debt, the strength of their lien was impaired by its very exclusiveness. By contract and in equity, the first mortgage bondholder was entitled to the full satisfaction of his claims. To enforce his rights, he could if necessary seize the property. If the line served as a part of a through route with other lines, each of which was covered by a separate first mortgage, then his rights of property repossession were of little value. The strength of the bond lay in the fact that the secured property was a part of the railroad system. The exercise of the right of foreclosure might prove a dangerous gesture. The bondholders, probably for the first time in the country's financial history, were presented with this paradox. Though they seemed to be strong, their position was weak, and this weakness was not overlooked by financial observers. There seemed to be "little doubt that it would be a financial mistake," declared one writer, for the first mortgage bondholders "to enforce their equitable rights to the extent of disrupting the continuous system."[^14] Here was one of the earliest recognitions on record of the subordination of primary legal rights of the mortgage contract in a system pattern.

Despite this gloomy picture, opposition immediately developed. A meeting of the underlying bondholders on the line east of the Mississippi was held early in July. Ashley, secretary of the purchasing committee, was present and invited the fullest investigation of the company's accounts. The bondholders appointed a committee which decided to confer with the purchasing committee and make recommendations. The committee did not take long to consider the suggestion of the purchasing committee. In less than a month its report and recommendation were ready; it voted to recommend to the bondholders the acceptance, subject to some slight modifications, of the committee's proposals.

Although the committee thus approved the suggested reduction in interest charges from 7 to 5 per cent, the bondholders were not bound. The recommendation, therefore, produced no important change. Even before this committee was organized, another group of bondholders decided to oppose the reorganization plan. They objected to the proposed reduction in fixed charges on the underlying bonds as calculated to aid the collateral trust and general mortgage bondholders. The lead was taken by the Chicago division bondholders who pointed out that that division had earned all its interest charges.

These bondholders asserted that the existing receivers had been appointed as a result of a proceeding in which they had no interest. The case was presented before a judge who had already made a record of judicial independence. Judge Walter L. Gresham, afterward Cleveland's Secretary of State, had already gone on record that courts had been too liberal in granting receiverships.[^15]

A number of other bondholders who had also begun court proceedings to oppose the Gould-sponsored plan of reorganization joined hands with the Chicago group. The judge acted with reasonable promptness. After listening to the evidence he instructed the receivers early in August to prepare a report on their management of the Chicago division.[^16]

Gould recognized that he had a fight on his hands, and that he had no means of exerting pressure upon the senior bondholders. Neither he nor his allies had any holdings of these bonds. Sage, Humphreys, and Dillon, the co-endorsers on the Wabash notes, had holdings of the Wabash stock, as did Hopkins. Sage had also some of the Wabash general mortgage bonds. It appeared therefore that Gould was helpless—but, as always with respect to Gould, appearances were misleading. He soon discovered another device, novel in character, which appeared to give him the necessary leverage.

The new financial mechanism involved the functioning of the purchasing committee. That committee, although presumably independent, was, to use the expression of a critical Wabash security holder, "under the thumb of Jay Gould."[^17] It administered the details of the reorganization, managed the property until formally released by the court, and received the company's revenue and paid its expenses. The decree accompanying the foreclosure sale in April had required the receivers to pay and discharge the receivers' obligations. Instead, the receivers bought their obligations, and kept them alive; the committee then held the certificates as a prior lien against the property. When the certificates were paid off, their former holders had no claim against the road. The purchasing committee, however, having paid off the receivers' certificates with the funds of the company, had a lien against its property, superior to that held by the underlying bondholders.

Even this was not the whole story. The purchasing committee had succeeded in inducing Judge Brewer to issue an order authorizing the receivers, who were business friends of Gould, to pay interest on senior bonds only as requested by the purchasing committee. The committee did not wait long in taking advantage of the new order. With the co-operation of the receiver, it would hereafter pay interest only to those senior bondholders who agreed to the proposals to reduce interest charges. The committee then declared that if the dissenters did not agree, the resulting litigation would be "long and expensive."[^18]

These proceedings met with an abrupt check in December, 1886. Judge Gresham, in "probably one of the most important decisions ever entered in a railroad case in this country,"[^19] condemned the Wabash receivership. The bondholders' application for the appointment of an independent receiver was granted, and, what was equally important, the court appointed the distinguished judge, Thomas M. Cooley, to the position. The new receiver was authorized to take possession of the property east of the Mississippi River and to displace Gould's two associates. The decision was a "complete surprise" to Wall Street,[^20] and the price of Wabash securities declined sharply. Gould's associates in the reorganization of the property were pessimistic. Joy, who had spent so many months in this country and in England to work out the reorganization, stated that all plans of the purchasing committee having failed, the Wabash system would be broken up.[^21]

Gould himself entertained no such thoughts. The Wabash was just as essential to the Missouri Pacific in December of 1886 as it had been before. He was therefore ready with a renewed proposal calculated, despite Judge Gresham's decision, to expedite the progress of the reorganization. He proposed, through the purchasing committee, to pay the accumulated unpaid interest on the first mortgage bonds if the court would transfer title to the property to the purchasing committee. Judge Gresham refused to agree. On the first of January, 1887, in accordance with the orders of the court, the existing receivers relinquished the roads east of the Mississippi to Judge Cooley. The eastern and western lines of the Wabash were again independent as they had been prior to the merger of 1879.

The underlying bondholders now delivered a counterattack. Appearing before Judge Brewer in the St. Louis Circuit Court—the court in which the Wabash receivers were appointed in May, 1884—they demanded that the court order a distribution to them of more than $1,300,000, which, they said, represented the surplus earnings of the Chicago division. They insisted that these earnings had been used to finance deficits on other parts of the system. The decision of Judge Brewer was one of the most unusual in judicial history. He answered the request of the bondholders at great length and with considerable warmth. He defended the receivers whom he had appointed against the charges by Judge Gresham. The purchasing committee, he insisted, bought the property under conditions prescribed by the court, and the court therefore had no moral or legal right to saddle any such burden upon the committee. He therefore dismissed the petition of the first mortgage bondholders.[^22]

Gould on his part pressed his attacks and carried his demand for the release of the main eastern lines upon the payment of the accumulated interest to the United States Supreme Court. The nonassenting bondholders also put in their counterclaim. The struggle in the courts was only shadow boxing, neither side believing that its proposal would be successful. Nothing came of these thrusts and counterthrusts. Gould was convinced that the determined opposition which had wound up successfully in the far-reaching decision of Judge Gresham could not be swayed by either frontal or flank attacks. He recognized that he could not use the floating debt or the collateral trust bonds to secure a strategic position in the reorganization. He still held the stock which he had bought in the spring of 1883 in connection with the Wabash lease to the Iron Mountain. Since then he had bought additional stock and was now probably the road's largest stockholder.[^23]

Gould concluded that it was impossible to eliminate the opposition of the underlying bondholders, and he accordingly prepared a new plan. It proposed the creation of a first mortgage upon the main lines of the road east of the Mississippi River between St. Louis, Chicago, and Toledo. Existing first mortgage bonds would be exchanged for new bonds. The bonds, except those on the Detroit division, would also receive their past-due interest in cash.

A second mortgage, while covering the same lines east of the Mississippi River, would also include a first lien on the road's equipment. The existing second mortgage bonds, and branch line bonds, would be converted into the new second mortgage bonds. Upon foreclosure, the lines east of the Mississippi would be united with those west of the river.[^24] The plan appeared to be fair to the underlying bondholders. All previous devices designed by Gould to force the underlying bondholders into a plan not of their own choosing had failed. It seemed now that the reorganization was virtually completed.

Some of the investors, however, refused to accept the terms. One group of first mortgage bondholders conceived the idea that they were entitled to a lien on the equipment. They therefore decided to fight the plan. Their committee insisted that since every division on which the bonds had a lien had earned its interest, the bondholders should make no sacrifice. They declared, furthermore, that the equipment should be divided among the first mortgage bondholders. The court decided in favor of the bondholders. The equipment belonged to the bondholders, and must be apportioned among them on an equitable basis. In the absence of any other basis, it was suggested that the mileage be used.[^25]

This was the most sweeping victory which any group of bondholders had ever secured against Gould. With this decision to support them, the bondholders decided to make a wholesale attack on the plan. They determined that in order to get full value, they would bid at the foreclosure sale and compete against the purchasing committee. This was a unique situation. The minority bondholders' committee asked its followers to deposit 25 per cent of their holdings with a trust company to be used to bid for the property. If it outbid the purchasing committee, it could retain title to the property and dispose of it to a competitor of the Wabash. If its bid were exceeded by the purchasing committee, the bonds could be sold at a profit.[^26]

The foreclosure sale, climaxing almost five years of complicated negotiations, and unprecedented in many respects in financial history, took place on May 15, 1889. The minority committee bought three main-line divisions, while the purchasing committee bought the other divisions. It appeared for a moment that the property east of the Mississippi would be split in two parts, each hostile to the other. To prevent this, the purchasing committee had no alternative but to make a bid for the entire road including all the divisions as one unit. The bid was made and the entire property was sold to the purchasing committee.[^27] Thus ended one of the most successful minority bondholders' suits in American corporate history.

The sale put a heavy burden on the Wabash. Before the reorganization could be completed and title passed to a new company it was necessary to buy out the dissenting bondholders. To accomplish this the committee on behalf of the new company was obliged to issue between $5,000,000 and $6,000,000 of bonds. The first mortgage bonds, in consequence of the successful fight made by the minority bondholders, rose to a premium. The minority bondholders received, instead of the 5 per cent bonds given to the assenting bondholders, one hundred cents on the dollar of their bonds in cash. By July the details of the reorganization were completed; the receiver turned the property over to the purchasing committee, and the latter turned it over to a new company, which had also acquired the properties west of the Mississippi. The new Wabash railroad thus succeeded the old Wabash as the owner of the consolidated line between Toledo, Kansas City and Omaha.

The long fight to reorganize the road was over. Gould's initial efforts to acquire control at a low price, via the floating debt, were unsuccessful. His failure was not due to his own lack of shrewdness or foresight or trading ability, but rather to the forthright independence of an able judge who had unhesitatingly condemned the passive acquiescence of a brother member of the judiciary. Judge Gresham by eliminating the friendly receivers in favor of an outstanding independent receiver for the lines east of the Mississippi eliminated most of Gould's trading advantages. Gould was forced to deal with the dissenting underlying bondholders on a basis of their respective rights and privileges. Even then he was successful in inducing most of the first and second mortgage bondholders to accept a reduction in interest charges from 7 to 5 per cent. In his efforts to reduce the interest charges paid on the junior mortgage bonds and to raise a fund from the stockholders for the purpose of improving the property and to provide part of the reorganization expenses, he was successful. The general and collateral trust bonds were exchanged partly for unsecured debentures and partly for income bonds.

The fixed charges of the reorganized company were substantially less than those of the old. The company, furthermore, was strengthened by the elimination of the leased lines that were designed originally to serve as the basis of new through routes. Competition having removed the possibility of establishing such routes, the properties were left as they had been before, as little deserts, surrounded by green fields of rich traffic.

Gould retained control of the policies of the new company, thereby serving well the interests of his enlarged Missouri Pacific system. As a stockholder, he gained little, since the price of the stock was not improved by the reorganization. According to the secretary of the purchasing committee, Gould by the summer of 1886 had lost $6,000,000 or $7,000,000 in Wabash securities.[^28]

While Gould considered the Wabash as an indispensable eastern outlet for his southwestern system, he believed it equally essential to retain the Texas & Pacific as an important feeder of eastbound traffic. Gould's hold on the Texas & Pacific was weaker than his hold on the Wabash. Although he found it more difficult on the Texas & Pacific to acquire control of key bits of railroad and terminal properties, he did nevertheless succeed in creating a floating debt, this time in favor of the Missouri Pacific. The floating debt was secured by a peculiar obligation in the form of a bond secured by a general mortgage, subject to the other system mortgages, and by a lien on some terminal property in New Orleans. It was a bond about which almost nothing was known. It appeared on its face to have considerable strength, because it had, presumably, an exclusive lien on the New Orleans terminal facilities essential to the effective operation of the Texas & Pacific. In fact, the terminal properties were unimportant, they were poorly located, and represented only a slight investment. It was nevertheless through the exploitation of the putative value of these bonds that Gould, in the first stage of reorganization, endeavored to acquire a controlling position with a nominal cash investment.

Both in physical layout and in the complexity of the financial structure, the Texas & Pacific problem was simpler than that of the Wabash. The former did not have a complex assortment of leased lines and feeders. The road consisted of three divisions, each serving a separate territory. The middle division, built by (T. A.) Scott in the period prior to Gould control, was the most productive portion, extending from Shreveport to Texarkana, and from that point to the commercial center of north Texas at Fort Worth. The second division was the old New Orleans Pacific from New Orleans to Shreveport. The third, the Rio Grande division—the longest and least prosperous of the system—ran from Fort Worth to El Paso. This was the line which Gould, with the co-operation of Scott, had built in such a hurry. From this line an extravagant flow of business had been anticipated. As a fact, almost the precise opposite occurred. Even the gloomiest prognosticator could hardly have predicted the nominal flow of business over this division. Upon completion of the Southern Pacific lines to New Orleans in 1882, the transcontinental traffic was "wholly lost."[^29] Of its extensive mileage, only 160 miles had any population or originated any traffic.

The financial structure of Texas & Pacific corresponded to its simple physical layout. On the middle division there rested a small first mortgage followed by a larger second mortgage. Another first mortgage covered the New Orleans Pacific, and still another the Rio Grande division. There was also a financial curiosity in the form of an Income and Land Grant mortgage, secured by a first mortgage on land grants and a junior mortgage on the rest of the property. Finally, there was an enticing tidbit in the form of the General and Terminal Mortgage with a first lien on some New Orleans terminal property. This was the collateral held as part security for the Missouri Pacific's advance, which, in Gould's opinion, made the loan "perfectly safe."[^30]

Of the three divisions, the middle division was the most profitable. Since most of these bonds were held in Philadelphia,[^31] it is not surprising that a citizen of that city, General I. J. Wistar, assumed the leadership in organizing these bondholders. Gould made proposals to Wistar which, although never published, threw the general into the Gould camp. Scarcely more than three months after the receivership the general arranged for a meeting in Philadelphia. There he informed the bondholders that a committee of its choosing, which had investigated the condition of the company, had been unable to find anything unfair in the road's management.[^32] Gould received a whitewash.

To informed people it should have become evident that Gould was preparing another of his financial moves. The financial public, made cautious through experience, was already on the watch. The perennial financial critic, for example, hardly more than a week after the receivership, issued its warning. The security holders of the road, it declared, should organize immediately for their protection, unless they were "willing to see their rights trampled upon, and the control of the property put entirely beyond their reach in the hands of Mr. Jay Gould, or his alter ego, the Missouri Pacific. There has been much parade made of the Philadelphia interest in the property, but to those who have observed the methods practiced with other roads, the hand of Gould seems clearly discernible in the Texas & Pacific operations, and it appears like a determined effort to get control of the property for a merely nominal consideration."[^33]

Although many groups were organized in the few months following the receivership, none made any substantial progress except the Wistar committee with which nearly all of the middle division bonds had been deposited.[^34] The Wistar plan reduced interest charges from $1,970,000 to approximately $1,115,000. The reduction was made possible by foreclosure of all the mortgages except that of the small first lien on the middle division. All other bonds would be changed either for new first mortgage or income bonds.

Gould's interest, however, lay in the distribution of the common stock. The plan proposed an exchange of three shares of the old company for one of the new and offered the stockholder of the old company the right to buy at $15 per share the stock of the new. Finally, it liquidated the floating debt of $1,800,000 held by the Missouri Pacific through the issue of new stock at $20 per share, i.e., five shares of stock for $100 of debt.[^35] This was the extraordinary part of the plan: For the Missouri Pacific's claim, whose validity never had been established, it was proposed to issue $9,000,000 par value of stock. To put it another way, the Missouri Pacific would buy this amount of stock at $20 a share. And even though the present stockholders bought new stock at $15 a share, they could not hope to acquire control of the property.

Again Gould had taken advantage of a small debt, created under questionable conditions, in order to dominate a property with a small investment. The plan was immediately assailed. "So bold a plan to squeeze out stockholders and get possession of a company," cried one critic, "has seldom been proposed, and it would be far cheaper for stockholders to pay a cash assessment of 10 per cent on their present holdings, and thus put over $3,000,000 in the treasury, than to be practically wiped out by this plan proposed in the Gould interest."[^36] The Rio Grande division bondholders denounced this provision of the plan as a "freeze out."[^37]

The Wistar proposal, as the first in the field, acquired all those strategic advantages which normally accrue to the first constructive plan in any field of negotiations. Other groups of security holders now rushed their plans. The Rio Grande division bondholders appointed a committee, of which Charles N. Fry, president of the Bank of New York, was the most prominent member. Only in the treatment of the floating debt and of the stock were there any important differences from the Wistar plan. The Fry group proposed that the floating debt be exchanged for junior mortgage bonds. Gould's Missouri Pacific would thereby receive a slight equity in the new company. The stock was to be assessed, and the voting power placed for three years in the hands of the reorganization committee.

This plan, representing the views of the weakest of the system bondholders, made only a slight impression. Another, however, submitted some weeks thereafter by a committee headed by Robert Fleming, and representing security holders of all divisions, met with a different reception. This plan was designed to remove the basis of Gould's strong position in the reorganization by buying up the bonds of the middle division. With the help of a strong underwriting syndicate, including Drexel, Morgan & Company, it proposed to buy these bonds at a price close to par. With the bonds out of the way, Wistar and his group would have little to say in formulating the plans of reorganization. This plan "somewhat staggered" the Wistar committee,[^38] and probably also staggered Gould himself. If it were successful it would place the reorganization in the hands of a man who, it was clear to Gould, was no friend of his. The dominating force in the house of Drexel, Morgan & Company, at least in the field of railroad financing, was Morgan, the man who, in carrying out in such a masterful manner the reorganization of the West Shore, had ignored Gould's suggestions.

After weeks of discussion, Wistar found the basis for a common interest with this group. The two committees shook hands, merged their interests, and produced a new plan. The new committee consisted of four representatives from the Wistar and three from the Fleming group. The essentials of the Wistar plan, calling for a reduction in fixed charges as had been originally proposed, were retained. The stock to be outstanding under the newHere's the continuation of the formatted chapter: