# Chapter XXIII - Gould Monopolizes Western Union

Gould's stroke in acquiring the Western Union in 1881, far from being accepted as a masterpiece of corporate strategy, was almost universally regarded as a serious blunder. Besides the chorus of public condemnation of the company as a monopoly and a public oppressor, there was the conviction in financial circles that the new water-logged combination would not be able to pay dividends. In fact, according to many, it would seem that the company was headed for disaster. If it could earn enough to pay a 6 per cent dividend upon an inflated stock base, the telegraph business must be decidedly profitable. New capital would be attracted, competition would increase, and the rate of profit decline.

Gould knew this danger. Despite his preoccupation with the many problems of railroad strategy, he acted with promptness and energy to forestall some of the competition. First he made an agreement with the Pennsylvania which removed the outstanding differences with that company. Threat and counter-threat, suit and countersuit, all vanished in an atmosphere of harmony. Scott, president of the road, was then associated with Gould in financing the construction of the Texas & Pacific. Precisely what proposals passed between Gould and the Pennsylvania officialdom, and the agreements reached, are not known. Shortly after his acquisition of the Western Union, Gould did travel to Philadelphia to visit the road's officials, and thereafter the friction between the two properties disappeared.

Gould then moved quickly to the next major competitive problem, the Baltimore & Ohio, a road which under the direction of Garrett maintained an independent policy with respect to the express, sleeping-car and telegraph services. The company had no exclusive contracts with the Western Union and had encouraged every promising competitor of the telegraph monopoly. When Gould merged the American with the Western Union, he did not long hesitate in opening negotiations with the Baltimore & Ohio for the acquisition of its telegraph system. A reversal in policy was of course no novelty to Gould. What explanations he made to the Baltimore & Ohio management, what alluring promises he extended, are not known. An agreement for a union of the railroad's telegraph lines with those of the Western Union was almost consummated, and it was only the intervention of Garrett that knocked these negotiations, all but completed, "into a cocked hat."[^024_1]

Garrett soon renewed the struggle against the Western Union. The Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph lines early in 1881 were still confined largely to its own system, and the company had not yet taken advantage of the law which authorized a railroad to enter the general telegraph business. Instead, the road allied itself with the Mutual Union Telegraph,[^024_2] which had just begun business (December, 1880) with a capital stock of only $20,000. Early in 1881, however, the company announced plans to extend its property, so that in the course of time, it would do about 90 per cent of the profitable telegraphic business of the country.[^024_3] To finance its program, it sold $5,000,000 of bonds. Each bondholder would receive a stock bonus equal to the par of the bonds. By the fall of the year the company had succeeded in attracting a number of important capitalists, including Keene and Vanderbilt.

The biggest stroke by the Mutual Union, however, was its lease of the Baltimore & Ohio's wire system in September, 1881.[^024_4] The Western Union officials were aware of the significance of this event, and took active steps to meet the menacing competition. Some of their acts were discreditable, and although Gould's name was not directly mentioned, there is little doubt that his influence was dominant. The Western Union, through Erastus Wyman, a member of the board, supported by the vice president and general manager, bribed a clerk in the office of the contractors who were then building the lines of the Mutual Union in order to secure a copy of the railroad-telegraph contract. Wyman seems to have had a glib and ready tongue, and was indiscreet in expressing the motives of the Western Union management. "We will get these Mutual Union folks on the rock yet," he said.[^024_5] He declared that he wanted the newspapers to make a "stink" so as to impair the credit of the Mutual Union; then he would get a Mutual Union bondholder to sue for a bill of discovery and thus get the construction contract into court.[^024_6]

The Mutual Union continued to expand and soon increased its financial strength and attracted new leadership and capital. Before the end of 1881 its promoters succeeded in interesting a New York banker, George F. Baker, who only a few years before had created a sensation in government bond circles. Baker was a man of deep silences. More than thirty years later, at the height of his power as one of the richest and most influential men of his time, he was still unknown. An observer in 1913 remarked: "Like the Man in the Iron Mask, George F. Baker, the New York banker has the unusual distinction of being important, yet unknown."[^024_7] Baker bought the controlling interest in the First National Bank soon after the Panic of 1873, and shortly after this he became its president. In the United States Government Bond Syndicate of 1879, Baker, in conjunction with another bank, made a stroke which gave his bank a national reputation. There was some fear that the new bonds would not sell well, and that perhaps only foreign banks would bid for the issue. The Baker-led syndicate, however, responded to the government offering with an "unparalleled" subscription—the largest single subscription ever made for a government loan in any country.[^024_8] Baker had also participated in a number of successful railroad bond issues. He was also the leader in the Tide Water Pipe Line which fought John D. Rockefeller to a standstill.

The association of Baker with the Mutual was followed almost immediately by announcements of plans to extend its business throughout the country. Although Baker assumed the leadership of new enterprises, he was not the kind of man to engage in a fight in an effort, regardless of losses, to sustain his position, or to maintain his personal dignity. Like most bankers, he was peculiarly sensitive to the interests of his immediate followers; to those who in response to his leadership had bought securities. Gould therefore played his hand accordingly. By the fall of 1881 Gould was probably the most successful litigant in American history. His court suits had been almost phenomenally successful. He always "knew the judge." When he wanted secretly to change the terms of a corporate trust, he found a judge to do his bidding. When he wanted to prevent some friendly interests from paying the rental on the New York Elevated, he found a judge to help him carry out his policy. When he needed the help of the court to appoint friendly receivers for the Manhattan Elevated, receivers who were on his corporate pay roll, he found a judge to accommodate him. When he wanted to exert competitive pressure on Field by denying to him the right to repossess his elevated property, he found a judge who would fulfill his wish. He was at the height of his judicial power in the fall of 1881, when he recognized that it was necessary to take strong action in an effort to defeat the growing strength of the Mutual Union.

In again entering the courts of the land as a means of furthering his objectives, he followed the technique in which he had been so successful. His name appeared in none of the early suits. Individuals unimportant in the business community—clerks and others unknown, equipped with a few shares of stock—suddenly appeared in the courts and challenged the legality of the Mutual Union's policies. It was alleged in one suit that the company was violating the Page patent which had been exploited for years in litigation. In another case it was alleged that the Mutual Union had violated its charter by the issuance of stock without compensation. These suits embarrassed the Mutual Union. The preliminary injunctions, as usual, were granted. The company's legal position was under a cloud and careful businessmen were reluctant to enter into contracts with a concern whose right to exist was seriously challenged. Gould had correctly interpreted the character of Baker. Baker, instead of fighting back as had Cornelius Vanderbilt, entered into negotiations for a settlement. He recognized more quickly than other early Gould opponents, who his real antagonist was, and it was not long before an agreement was made. The Mutual Union then had outstanding 100,000 shares of stock and of this amount Gould, after buying from Baker 13,000 shares at $5 a share and an additional 8,500 shares from the construction company at the same price, agreed to ask the court to discontinue the lawsuits. After the court had acted favorably, Gould was privileged to buy an additional 10,000 shares at $10 a share. Gould and Baker furthermore agreed to trustee their joint holdings.[^024_9]

It is not clear whether this was an arrangement between the two men personally or between them on behalf of the companies. Baker and his group insisted that the arrangement was personal. Gould advertised it as calculated to eliminate the competitive difficulties between the two companies. Despite the nature of the agreement, it came to the public in the form of an announcement that the two companies had combined, that the earnings were to be pooled, and that any excess earnings were to go to the Western Union.[^024_10] There was of course no such close union. Baker apparently believed that if he sold Gould a block of stock that Gould would not continue to oppose the company's policies. Baker probably was aware of the fact that Gould had frequently been on both sides of a corporate contract, and that he had frequently represented adverse interests. He apparently believed that if Gould purchased some Mutual Union stock at a low price, his interest in promoting the welfare of that company would be greater than his loss as a stockholder of Western Union.

Whatever the intentions of Gould and Baker, later events belied the existence of any close union between the two companies. "Scarcely a week has passed" since the date of the announcement of the contract, declared a contemporary observer, . . . "without something turning up which was strangely incongruous with this reported agreement."[^024_11] The conflict was soon brought to a climax in a quarrel between the Western Union and one of its leading customers, the Associated Press, which took strong exception to certain contracts upon which the Western Union insisted, and transferred an important part of its business to the Mutual Union.

It became clear to Baker that in relying upon the agreement with Gould he had erred. Even before the conflict over the Associated Press, Gould had already acted. Without transferring the Mutual Union stock to the name of the Western Union, he sold the stock to the latter company at its cost to him. The Western Union board and its law committee formally passed upon the transaction, and the company assumed the obligations incurred by him in the purchase of the securities.[^024_12] Within a few weeks, Gould purchased additional shares on the market at an average price of $6 to $10 a share, and these he also transferred to the Western Union.

By the summer of 1882 the Western Union controlled 40,000 shares out of a total of 100,000 outstanding. Under normal conditions this would have been sufficient for control; indeed under some conditions, the ownership of as little as 15 per cent is sufficient to effect control. In this particular instance, however, 40 per cent was not enough. If Gould was quiet and effective, Baker was equally effective and equally silent. Baker, recognizing the danger, moved quickly. He personally owned 20,000 shares of Mutual stock, and with most of the balance of non-Gould stock owned by loyal followers, he succeeded in enlisting the support of holders of more than 50,000 shares. Thus Baker outmatched Gould. If Gould had placed 40,000 shares with Western Union, then he (Baker) would place 50,000 with the Central Trust Company as depository. The three trustees to administer the new trust were George W. Ballou, the first president and promoter of the Mutual, A. P. Potter, president of a small bank, in whom Baker had great faith, and Baker himself.

Gould was thus on the defensive. Baker, as usual, said little. Indeed in the very nature of the case, it was not necessary that he say or do anything. The next step was Gould's, and his action, as usual, was prompt and decisive. He asked for an injunction, which was immediately granted, to restrain the trust company and the trustees. However Gould's record as a successful litigant was coming to an end. The lawsuit device was now to be used against him. "An exhaustless crop of suits" were springing up against the Western Union, noted a contemporary observer.[^024_13] The Western Union was being sued in the states of Pennsylvania and New York on the ground that its charter was invalid, and Gould perhaps anticipated the sting of defeat in this litigation.

In this maze of legal entanglements and competitive aggression, the Western Union early in December, 1882, was facing another threat. Forbes, the veteran chairman of the Burlington, decided that the time had come to extricate his road from a Western Union contract which, in his own language, was then "bearing so heavily" upon the road.[^024_14] The contract executed in 1872 for a twenty-five-year period had about fourteen years more to run. Garrett, of the Baltimore & Ohio, who was now one of Gould's most persistent enemies, stood ready to pro rate business with the Burlington's 4,400 miles of wire, mile for mile.

So momentous did Forbes consider the impending struggle against the Western Union that he ignored the advice of his physician who had ordered him to take a rest in Florida. Forbes's judgment was warped by his personal dislike of Gould as a stock-market trader. He was particularly savage in his characterization of Gould's management of the Western Union which, he believed, embraced the censorship of clients' messages. Upon one occasion, perhaps in a moment of exasperation, he asked Garrett why the editor of the New York Times who had "brought Tweed down to his marrow bones" could not win additional credit "by getting Gould into his proper quarters, the P—, a place I will not mention for fear of the law of libel."[^024_15]

It is therefore not surprising that he adopted measures characteristic of the Gould tactics that he had so roundly denounced. Although he had determined to engage in a struggle against the Western Union, he did not wish to make a definite commitment. Accordingly, when he decided to intervene in a lawsuit in New York challenging the validity of the Western Union charter, he did so through a third person for whose account he would buy a few shares of Western Union. This device of acting through a small security holder who appeared in court in the interests of the public welfare had been successfully used by Gould in his campaign to acquire control of the Manhattan Elevated. Forbes, however, had neither the skill nor the trading following of Gould, and his efforts to locate a person, who would intervene in the Western Union suit, were not successful. Among others, Forbes tried to enlist the aid of George Jones, editor of the New York Times, a consistent critic of Gould and his corporate policies. Forbes asked Jones confidentially whether he would be willing under proper indemnities to have his name used as a stockholder in joining the Western Union suit.[^024_16] This approach was unsuccessful.

While Forbes was thus laying the groundwork for an intervention in the Western Union suit, he was also devising schemes to break the Burlington's Western Union contract. In addition to putting the road's counsel to work, Forbes engaged outside aid. He sent Richard Olney, an outstanding young attorney, a copy of the contract, instructed him to keep it for his own eye and then to return it carefully. "Our hope is to break it on some flaw," wrote Forbes, "either on its merits or its want of confirmation by our Board, or under the law of Congress" which permitted the railroads to do a public telegraph business.[^024_17] Olney, replying in a lengthy communication, pointed out to Forbes that it would be possible to invalidate that section of the contract which gave the Western Union the "exclusive right of way" upon the Burlington, and that, even though the other provisions of the contract were sustained, the contract with the monopoly clause excluded would seriously impair its value.[^024_18]

The Burlington's board, however, was not wholly in accord with Forbes's actions. The "prevailing opinion" among the board, as reflected in a meeting held in late December, was to the effect that "not much could be gained" by joining in the Western Union attack. The board, nevertheless, did believe that it would be worth while to understand whether the road was really tied to the Western Union so that it could not trade with the Baltimore & Ohio or with anyone else.[^024_19]

Gould, it may be safely assumed, was well aware of the legal loophole that Forbes's counsel had so solicitously uncovered. As usual, he had plenty of ammunition in his corporate armory. The decision in this telegraph war in which Forbes so actively intervened was not to be decided in the courts of law, for Gould had another club in his trading closet. In September, 1882, he had acquired control of the Hannibal which owned the line serving as an outlet for the Burlington to Kansas City and the Southwest,[^024_20] and it is probable that Forbes's bitterness against Gould late in 1882 may be ascribed to his control of this road. In the months that followed Gould's purchase of the Hannibal, suspicions, reports, and guesses of his intentions were widespread. Gould, sojourning in Florida, maintained however a policy of silence.

The competitors of the Western Union meanwhile solicited the Burlington in an effort to get an increasing share of its telegraph business. An official of the Postal, for example, explained the advantages of the company's new mechanical contrivances,[^024_21] while the Baltimore & Ohio proposed that it be given the opportunity to build on part of the Burlington's right of way.[^024_22]

Gould, upon his return from Florida, almost immediately opened negotiations with the Burlington's officials. The Burlington wanted the Hannibal, and Gould wanted the Burlington's telegraph business. To the Burlington the perennial Gould problem again emerged. How far should it yield to the Western Union in order to close the Hannibal trade? The negotiations in the form of personal conversations, telegrams and letters lasted for several weeks. The Burlington in the end acquired the Hannibal and surrendered on the Western Union, and Garrett was again defeated. Gould, as in so many other instances in his career, surrendered his less vital interests in behalf of the more important ones. He enhanced the strength of the Burlington against the Wabash in the struggle for the southwestern business. On the other hand, by assuring to the Western Union control of the telegraph business of the Burlington, he strengthened its competitive position.

While Gould was trading with the Burlington, he continued to press the suit against Baker. He did not, however, get the permanent injunction he requested. The judge refused to be stamped into a decision.

Gould tried another device. He asked the attorney-general to bring suit in the name of the people to invalidate the charter of the Mutual, on the ground that most of its stock had been issued without any consideration. It was the same device that he had used successfully on another attorney-general. The new attorney-general granted the application against the Mutual.[^024_23]

This time, however, Gould was not to have his way smoothed by weakness in the opposition. The attorney-general was not the same complaisant personality as the one who, little more than a year before, had been so easily influenced. The Mutual Union was also free to fight its own case before the attorney-general. Within a few weeks after he accepted the application of Gould to sue the Mutual, he also accepted an application to bring action on behalf of the people to invalidate the charter of the Western Union.[^024_24]

Both the Western Union and the Mutual were now ready for a fight. Both were about to file affidavits demonstrating the inequities, and uncovering the financial and trade secrets, of the other. The success of Gould in litigation was weakening. In January, 1883, he lost his contest with Baker, the court dissolving the temporary injunction to restrain the transfer of the Mutual's stock to Baker and his co-trustees. The Western Union, said the court, was not a party to the contract of March, 1882, and therefore Gould's sale of his Mutual stock to Western Union dissolved the contract.[^024_25]

Gould recognized that Baker was a determined foe and a man of means who had gathered behind him a group of associates and followers. The Mutual Union, furthermore, had become powerful and had made an alliance with some of Gould's foes, including Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio, and Vanderbilt of the New York Central. The company had also acquired exclusive rights of way on 23,000 miles of road, occupying territory that the Western Union wanted to occupy. Some of the latter's railroad contracts were made "very troublesome" to the Western Union, and to embarrass that company further, the Mutual Union pressed numerous suits to prevent it from using its wires freely.[^024_26]

Although Gould was ready to compromise he could not do so on his own terms. An understanding was reached, and although the terms were hard, Gould signed. The Western Union leased the Mutual Union and agreed to pay annually $500,000 as rental. Of this amount $300,000 represented the interest on bonds, $50,000 the sinking fund, and $150,000 a dividend on its stock. Each company agreed to withdraw the suits pending against the other, either in its own name or in the name of its security holders. Baker was taking no chances on any future ingenuity of Gould. He made Gould agree on behalf of himself and the security holders of the Western Union, so that no party in interest could create further trouble in the courts and upset the contract.

Thus a dangerous competitor of the Western Union was eliminated. Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio was again defeated. The Mutual and the Baltimore & Ohio, however, were not the only competitors of the Western Union. The latter's profits and dividends had attracted still others. Even though they did not develop the same early strength of the Mutual Union, nevertheless they constituted a threat to the monopoly. Soon after the Western Union merger of 1881, Keene, a former trading associate of Gould, gathered around him a number of capitalists and organized the Postal Telegraph Company[^024_27] which succeeded in acquiring control of a number of efficient mechanical devices.

Another small competitor of the Western Union, the American Rapid Telegraph, also the owner of a number of improved devices, was organized in the summer of 1880. Shortly after the Western Union merger, it decided to expand. The capital stock was increased to $10,000,000 of which $6,000,000 was offered to its shareholders at par.[^024_28] The company's capital stock was thus not watered. It proposed to sell the stock for cash and to use the proceeds to build a telegraph plant.

Another enterprise, the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph, was organized in April, 1881. It, too, avoided stock watering, financing requirements from the sale of stock at par or higher. This small property was prosperous, and in the last two quarters of 1882, paid a 2 per cent quarterly dividend.

The Southern Telegraph was another small company organized in the south. Considerable difficulty was experienced in financing its requirements.

Another venture, the Commercial Telegraph, organized in 1883, was designed to invade the Western Union's monopoly, exercised by its affiliate—Gold and Stock Telegraph Company—in the handling of stock exchange quotations. Its entrance into the business was heralded by a rate war; rates dropped 50 per cent.[^024_29]

Each company followed an independent course, and each did business in a selected territory. Except for the Baltimore & Ohio, none was able to secure any important railroad contracts, the very business which accounted for the prosperity of the Western Union. Gould, before the end of 1881, had succeeded with the help of counsel in perfecting the exclusive telegraph railroad contract. The new contract was so ironclad that future competition against the Western Union was exceptionally difficult. Gould of the Western Union made contracts with Gould as president or policy-maker in the multitude of railroads which he then controlled.

By the spring of 1883 the competitors of the Western Union, although profitable, were doing business on a restricted scale. The very fact of their ability to operate profitably led them to think in terms of expansion, to fight the well-entrenched Western Union. If a number of companies singly could do a successful business, then in co-operation each with the other, they could do even better. If the business was successful on a small local scale, it would succeed even more so on a large and national scale. Volume would increase, overhead decline, and increased profits develop.

The expansion of the Western Union, climaxed by the lease of the Mutual Union, appeared to lend force to the desirability of unifying the interests of the independent telegraph ventures into larger and more powerful concerns. The leadership of this movement was assumed by a stockbroker, A. W. Dimock, who had been successful in the inflation boom of 1879 to 1881. Like most traders, including Gould, he was unable to interpret the broad secular down-swing which began in 1881. At the peak of his career in 1881, he and a number of associates acquired control of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph, and shortly thereafter of the Southern Telegraph. No sooner did Dimock acquire control of these two properties, than he entered upon a program of rapid expansion. By September, 1883, he dominated a group of companies which owned wires from New England, through New York, Philadelphia, and Washington to many points in the Southeast. The combination made plans to extend even farther. Early in 1884 it bought the Lehigh Telegraph, serving eastern Pennsylvania, and the Commercial Telegraph, thus giving it a share of the growing stock-ticker business.

The Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph was an imposing combination. Like many other rapidly expanded consolidations, it was financed on an extravagant scale. In accordance with established custom, it was built in a period of booming prosperity when capital could be readily obtained. Unfortunately, this was also a period of high prices and of inefficient labor. Although the combination had increased in size, it had decreased in financial strength. Mortgages were placed upon its constituent properties. It was also proposed to increase its capital stock from $1,000,000 to $10,000,000.

Dimock's company early in 1884 was a formidable competitor of the Western Union, and, according to Dimock at least, by far the largest.[^024_30] Dimock felt certain of his competitive strength. There was no danger, he insisted, of his company merging with the Western Union. The stock was fully paid and the company's business was sound.

It is strange how confident every independent telegraph company was of its future success. Each was certain it would never sell out to the Western Union. The Western Union in the pre-Gould era had been equally certain that it would acquire no property of Gould's. Gould, however, defeated all these expectations. Soon after Green, president of the Western Union, declared early in 1881 that the company would fight it out with Gould's American Union, the Western Union merged with that property. When, less than two years later, the president of the Mutual declared that his property was and would continue to be independent of the Western Union, and Green declared that the report of the consolidation of the two properties "was absolutely without foundation,"[^024_31] the Western Union under Gould's leadership bought the property. A few years later when Garrett, speaking for the Baltimore & Ohio, insisted before a Congressional committee that his telegraph property would remain independent, his statements carried the same conviction as did the statements of the other Western Union competitors. The Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph, however, succumbed to the superior strength of the Western Union and to the trading genius of Gould.

During 1883 and 1884 not only Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph but also two others took steps to enlarge the scope of their operations. The Postal under Keene had not been successful. The stockholders were not satisfied with his administration, and in August of 1883 the management as well as the capital structure was changed. A number of directors resigned and their seats were taken by others, the most prominent of whom was John W. Mackey. A large block of stock was pooled, and Mackey and George S. Coe, president of the American Exchange National Bank, were appointed trustees. The stock was placed in trust for three years. During this time no member of the pool could sell.[^024_32] The new directors were men of affairs and of considerable wealth. They purchased additional stock and with the funds thus raised the company launched an expansion program to carry the lines from Chicago to St. Louis. Mackey, like Baker, had a following among investors and men of means. Unlike Baker, he was essentially a businessman. Baker was a shrewd banker and a skillful trader. Mackey was a business pioneer, inured to the taking of great risks. He had already acquired a fortune in the silver business, and understood the necessity of making heavy commitments and accepting correspondingly heavy financial responsibilities. He was a practical businessman, furthermore, in the sense that he looked farther ahead than did the investor or trader, recognizing that a long period of construction and preparation is imperative before large returns can be realized. Like Garrett he was a man of independent character, unimpressed by Gould's schemes. Rather, he made it clear that the newly reorganized Postal would fight the dominant Western Union with rate cuts which that company with its heavy capitalization would find it difficult to meet. To the critical public the forthcoming competition was not particularly edifying and promised little in substantial rate reductions. To one observer the idea of the bonanza kings from the Pacific Coast "coming to the rescue of the dear public to assist it in squeezing thirty or forty millions of water out of a modest eighty millions of capitalization [was] enough to split the sides of Jack Falstaff."[^024_33]

Mackey, however, was true to his word and the subsequent wars with the Western Union produced a permanent reduction in rates. Furthermore, he was not content with expansion in the land telegraph business. He realized that every telegraph company competing with the Western Union was at a handicap in competing with that property for transatlantic telegraph traffic. Since the pooling agreement in the spring of 1882 between the Gould cable company and its competitors, every transatlantic message to and from the United States passed over the wires of the Western Union. Neither the Baltimore & Ohio nor the Postal had any independent cable connection. Garrett of the former company tried to break up this arrangement. In these efforts he secured the aid of John Pender, chairman of one of the English cable companies, and popularly known as the English cable king. Pender traveled to New York but his negotiations were disappointing. Mackey, however, was not as naive as Pender. He perceived that he could make no deal with Gould, and even before Pender had concluded his negotiations, Mackey was busily making arrangements for a new independent cable. With the co-operation and financial help of James Gordon Bennett, publisher of the New York Herald, he signed the contract for the building of two Atlantic cables, the construction to be finished by June of 1884.[^024_34]

Thus the new competition begun in 1883 brought an era of declining profits for the Western Union. Although the company maintained its 7 per cent dividend, its earnings declined sharply. Its competitors, flush with money, were taking a large part of the business. The pressure upon Congress, meanwhile, to do something to increase competition, became too strong to be ignored. Early in 1883 a bill was introduced into the House of Representatives to authorize an examination of the nation's telegraph services.[^024_35] Another bill was introduced to revive a proposal, frequently suggested, of a postal telegraph system. In the Senate a resolution was passed early in 1884 instructing a committee to determine whether telegraph costs had been "injuriously affected" by the Western Union merger agreement and stock dividend; by contracts with cable companies and by the leasing of telegraph and cable lines. The committee was directed to ascertain whether the Western Union had made rules for the transmission of press news, or had introduced discriminations which had the effect of "restricting the free and independent use of the telegraph by the press."[^024_36] All these proposals, as well as some others, drifted off into investigation and ended in vapid speeches. Gould did not appear before the investigating committees; but he was ably represented by Green, president of the Western Union, who was liberal in supplying the committee with a vast fund of information, some useful, some irrelevant. Gould was also well represented by counsel, particularly John F. Dillon, a man who found legal justification for almost every move made by Gould.

Hardly had the House and Senate committees begun their investigations than the Western Union was confronted by a new threat. In January of 1884, timed almost to the week with these Congressional inquiries, the Baltimore & Ohio initiated an expansion policy. A new concern, incorporated in August, 1883—the National Telegraph—had made exclusive contracts with the West Shore and the Nickel Plate. The Baltimore & Ohio purchased control of this company, and later in the year also made telegraph contracts with another railroad. Garrett declared that his road proposed "to make a complete and perfectly equipped telegraph system that will cover the entire business area, North, South, East and West."[^024_37]

True to his word, Garrett began a policy of construction which exceeded that of the Western Union or of any other telegraph company in a comparable period. Within four months the Baltimore & Ohio built twenty thousand miles of wire. The Mutual had built many lines primarily to accommodate merchants with leased wires, and the Postal had built many lines in the Far West and Southwest. The Baltimore & Ohio, however, boldly attacked the Western Union by building lines into the larger metropolitan areas in which most of the business was done. It could not, however, get permission to build lines on a Gould road without its consent. The cost of building under this handicap was high. In addition the Baltimore & Ohio found that in some cases it could not even build on the rights of way of those railroads which had no relationship to Gould. In Massachusetts, for example, a bill was introduced to authorize any telegraph company to enter upon a railroad right of way and build structures in accordance with specifications approved by the railroad commissioners. The Baltimore & Ohio under the terms of this bill proposed to erect a telegraph line by using the tracks of the New England. This road was in receivership and the stockholders were bitter over the condition in which Gould had left their property. Gould was gone, but his influence remained. The evil that men do lives after them. Gould had loaded the New England with an exclusive contract and the court in charge of the receivership declined to disturb it.[^024_38]

Despite all this the Baltimore & Ohio expanded vigorously. Its program was well financed, over $3,000,000 of construction cost being charged to operating expenses. This was sound financial practice and in accordance with the policies followed by some of the best managed enterprises of the country. By midsummer of 1884, the road was serving territory from which the Western Union derived 75 per cent of its total revenue.[^024_39]

Here were three powerful competitors of the Western Union. The Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph was particularly strong in New England and through a subsidiary had some influence in the South. The Postal, although expanding more slowly, was making steady strides in the West. The lines of the Baltimore & Ohio covered the system of the railroad itself, the line between New York and Chicago owned by the West Shore and the Nickel Plate, and a number of other lines in the East and Middle West. The transatlantic cable owned by Mackey and Bennett operated in co-operation with the Baltimore & Ohio, as well as the Postal.

Of these three, the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph was financially the weakest. Its support came from men involved in stock-market speculation which culminated in the sharp break of May, 1884. At that time the property's construction program was unfinished. Such a property in the face of a depression, with business falling off, and fixed charges increasing, is in a dangerous position. So it was with the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph. It was one of the first casualties in the Panic of 1884. The president, personally, was not able to meet his obligations, and failed. He owned much of the company's stock, which he had pledged as collateral for personal loans. The effort of his creditors to sell the collateral broke its price from close to $150 to less than $50 a share. The stock was offered to the Western Union and refused.[^024_40] The company was thus left deserted in the midst of an uncompleted construction program, bereft of any financial support.

Here was an ideal situation for a corporate union of the three opposing units of the dominant company. It was a situation of which Gould had taken repeated advantage. All that was needed was leadership, supported by adequate funds. The funds were available. Mackey, the aggressive leader of the Postal, was a capitalist. Although he had suffered some losses, he was still a wealthy man. Garrett was also a capitalist and, what was more important, the credit of the Baltimore & Ohio was of the best.

It seemed for a few months in the summer of 1884 that a combination between these three companies was about to be formed. In the first week of June, when Gould's finances were still critical, the Postal and the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph entered into a twenty-five-year contract for the joint operation of facilities, the pooling of receipts, and for interlocking directorates.[^024_41] Here was another opportunity for the Baltimore & Ohio to increase the opposition to the Western Union. By joining the new group it would have succeeded in creating the strongest competition which the Western Union had ever encountered. Negotiations for a union were begun on July fourth and an agreement was reached on the thirty-first. The three companies agreed to pool their earnings, and although each company retained its corporate independence and assumed no responsibility for payment of the fixed charges of either of the other two, the joint properties were to be operated as a unified enterprise.

The business would be managed by a joint board comprising, among others, Garrett, Mackey, and Bennett.

On the surface this new combination appeared able and ready to make a real fight against the Western Union, to force it to reduce rates, to raise its standard of service, and perhaps to force a reduction if not a suspension of dividends. The property controlled by this combination was extensive; its wires reached many large cities and hence extended through territory doing about 80 per cent of the paying telegraph business.[^024_42] Soon after its organization telegraph rates of all three companies were reduced to the lowest existing level, which were those of the Postal, and about 50 to 65 per cent lower than those of the Western Union. Nevertheless, the combination was expected to earn from $1,200,000 to $1,500,000 per year.[^024_43]

The combination in all respects save one was stronger than the American Union which in 1881 had forced the hand of the Western Union. It reached more important commercial centers; it had a better balanced strength in different parts of the country; it was led by capitalists who had a strong following among investors rather than speculators. Its leaders, Garrett, Bennett, and Mackey, were in position either personally, or through the sale of securities, to furnish the needed capital. Unlike the American Union, the combination did not have many exclusive railroad contracts.

In order to strengthen its position among the railroads, the Baltimore & Ohio endeavored to accomplish by negotiation what Gould early in 1880 had achieved by bold action. The lines of the new combination reached the Union Pacific at Omaha. David H. Bates, president of the Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph system asked Adams, president of the Union Pacific, to enter into a business arrangement. Adams was the reforming president of the Union Pacific. It was expected that he would reverse the policies of Gould and thus bolster the financial strength of the road. Six months after Bates had made this initial request, he had received no reply. Then Adams, strange as it may seem, courteously referred his request to the Western Union for consideration.[^024_44]

Both Adams and the Baltimore & Ohio found that the Union Pacific was bound by a contract made with the Western Union in July, 1881, which was more exclusive than the one which Gould had so unceremoniously broken in February, 1880. The Baltimore & Ohio appealed the case to the Commissioner of Railroads who informed the Union Pacific that it must accept the business of the Baltimore & Ohio. It must, that is to say, accept business from that company as it did from any other individual or corporation; but it was not bound to make any mechanical connections with the Baltimore & Ohio or to enter into any credit relations with it.[^024_45] This was precisely the stand of the Union Pacific and of the Western Union. Despite this setback, the combination seemed to be on the road to success. Success, however, did not long continue. In many critical moments of his career, Gould had the good fortune of being confronted with poor business opposition. Again he was in luck. In the fall of 1884 the powerful combination against the Western Union suddenly and with almost no warning collapsed. In the first week of September the Baltimore & Ohio, asserting that the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph could not carry out its financial agreement, withdrew from the pool. The latter company had been financially weakened by the bankruptcy of its owners. Gould and his associates when faced with similar conditions tided a property over with the use of their own funds. In 1874 Gould took the lead in extricating the Union Pacific from financial embarrassment. In times of need, he had repeatedly lent money to the Wabash, the Missouri Pacific, and other properties. These loans were of course well secured. Gould served himself in extending these loans, but at the same time he kept the property afloat and retained control.

No such leadership sustained the telegraph pool in the fall of 1884. The employees of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph failed to get their wages on time, and the creditors talked of receivership. The stock could have been bought at nominal prices, or the members of the pool and their stockholders could have made loans to the company. It was not so to be, and the most formidable opposition that ever had been organized against the Western Union dissolved. The Baltimore & Ohio declared the pooling contract at an end. The decision of the road was a grave mistake. Apparently its managers believed that the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph would continue its existence as a separate corporation, and that even though a receiver was appointed, it would continue to function. The bonds were held by strong financial interests, including the Mutual Life Insurance, the Central Trust, and the Bank of Commerce. Again Gould's financial ingenuity, patience, and sense of accurate timing were underestimated. Both the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph and its major subsidiary, the American Rapid Telegraph, were placed in receivership. The receiver for the latter had indeed little to receive. Although it had issued mortgage bonds, such was the negligence of the bondholders that its property, on October 18,1883, was for all practical purposes delivered to its corporate parent. A contract was made by which the poles and wires of parent and child were joined in such a way that it was difficult to ascertain which belonged to which. Each party received the right to string its wires on the other's poles.[^024_46]

The creditors of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph meanwhile were making plans to build it up as a strong unit in the telegraph business. They secured the appointment of an able executive, General James G. Farnsworth, as receiver, and also enlisted the services of a number of promoters and capitalists to provide some money by the sale of stock. Some of these were Gould's enemies, particularly Woerishoffer, the hardy trader who had bested Gould in the bear market of 1884, and Josiah C. Reiff, long a Gould critic. The plan of reorganization of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph called for a foreclosure sale of the properties on July 10, 1885.

While these plans were on foot, Gould apparently did nothing. His silence, however, should have warned his watchful competitors of impending danger. Gould had made a close study of the reorganization proceedings. He was looking for a weak spot. He rarely failed to make a discovery, and this was not one of the exceptions. He learned that one of the largest individual bondholders of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph was Edward S. Stokes, and that the vice president of the American Rapid Telegraph had a grudge against Stokes. He also knew of the contract of October 18, 1883, by which the properties of the two corporations had been intermingled. Perhaps Gould could induce the receiver of the American Rapid Telegraph to force the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph to return its property, and thus be relieved of the contract of October 18, 1883. Early in June the receiver did in fact enter suit. He asked the court to order an investigation of the properties of both companies in order to determine the precise ownership of the poles, wires and other telegraph facilities. Such an investigation would be a slow proceeding. Gould, however, was planning bolder moves. Those who were sponsoring the reorganization of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph were suspicious of him. They probably believed that in some way he could negotiate a contract adverse to the interests of that company. Prudently, somewhat as Cornelius Vanderbilt did in February of 1868, they appealed to the courts to prevent such a move. Judge Shipman, in charge of the receivership, had promised the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph that no contract with the American Rapid Telegraph would be made without first giving the former a reasonable chance to protect itself. This arrangement with the judge was no more successful in thwarting Gould's plans than the series of injunctions secured years before by Cornelius Vanderbilt. Gould played upon the personalities involved. He discovered a new tool in the person of Frederic May, who succeeded in bringing together Gould and the receiver of the American Rapid Telegraph. They met on Gould's yacht, and an understanding was reached. What Gould gave the receiver is not clear. In any event, the receiver gave Gould a curious contract authorizing the Western Union to act as his agent. The existence of this contract was not known to anyone interested in the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph. Not any of the company's bondholders or stockholders, the reorganization manager, the bondholders' trustee, not even the federal judge in charge of the receivership who had also approved the plan of reorganization and set the day on which the foreclosure was to take place, had any knowledge of the contract. Gould was careful to preserve that state of blessed ignorance.

Gould was now armed with a deadly weapon. An ordinary person might have used this contract as a basis for negotiation with its opponent and made some countermoves before the judge. He might have tried to block or at least to delay the foreclosure sale. Gould did none of this. He ignored the receiver and the receivership estate, as well as the court jurisdiction. Gould presented the judge with a petition asking His Honor to instruct Farnsworth, the receiver for the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph, to hand over to the Western Union, as agent for the receiver of the American Rapid Telegraph, the property of the latter. Whose property it was, nobody knew, since it was then the object of judicial investigation. Neither the receiver for this company nor for the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph could identify the property. Gould, strange to say, was able to identify it. He listed the property in the complaint, so that the judge without further ado or investigation granted the petition. The order of judicial approval was immediately given to General Eckert, operating vice president of the Western Union. Eckert lost no time in serving the judge's order upon Farnsworth. The latter looked at the order, and his answer was obvious. He replied that he could not readily distinguish the wires of the two companies. The answer of Eckert, acting under instructions from Gould, was not so obvious. If Farnsworth could not distinguish the wires, he, Eckert, could. Eckert promptly cut all the wires of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph except those leading to Washington.

The business, if not the property, of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph was thus, with a single blow, destroyed. It was an outrageous proceeding, but from a business standpoint it was effective. Gould, like Frederick the Great who invaded Silesia without warning, acted first and explained later. Frederick the Great, in political and military life, has had many predecessors and successors. Gould in business and financial life has had few. The proceeding was condemned in violent language. The chairman of the reorganization committee denounced it as highway robbery. "I challenge," he said, "any one to produce a more iniquitous proceeding under the cover of law since the days of Barnard, Tweed, and Sweeny."[^024_47] The voluble Col. Robert G. Ingersoll, in his capacity as counsel in one of the many damage suits which followed this proceeding, spoke in even more challenging terms. "I do not believe," he thundered at the court, "that since man was in the habit of living on this planet anyone has ever lived possessed of the impudence of Jay Gould to make such a request of a judge."[^024_48] And Stokes, a large security holder of the decapitated telegraph company declared, "It was deliberate high-handed robbery. They don't seem to respect God, Judge or devil...."[^024_49]

At one blow Gould destroyed one of the most powerful competitors of the Western Union. The blow was sharp and sudden; more important, it was fatal. Damage suits were begun, eminent counsel was retained, eloquent speeches were made, and furious editorials were written. The earning power of the property, however, was reduced to a figment. The foreclosure sale was not held as scheduled and the equity money was not furnished. Thus did Gould eliminate, at almost no cost to himself or the Western Union, one of the latter's three most powerful enemies.[^024_50]

The other two members of the telegraph pool of 1884 still remained and offered competition as serious as ever. The strength of the Postal was exercised largely through its transatlantic cable. The activities of the Baltimore & Ohio precipitated the rate war of 1885 and 1886. Gould insisted that the Baltimore & Ohio could not long maintain this reckless form of competition, since it was losing $50,000 a month. The Baltimore & Ohio, however, declared that since it had charged many of its improvements to operating expense, its costs were low, and that even with a rate of 50 per cent below that of the Western Union, it still could operate.

While the Baltimore & Ohio was losing money, the Western Union also was seriously affected. Its losses arose not only from land, but also from cable competition. Early in 1886 it reduced the price of cable service to twelve cents a word, thereby creating a unique price war. The Commercial Cable declined to follow Gould all the way down and reduced its rates only to twenty-five cents a word. The company requested its customers to support it in this drastic rate war, pointing out that Gould and his group were interested, not in reducing rates, but in driving it out of existence. Many businessmen supported Mackey and continued to buy service from his company at a price 100 per cent higher than that paid by Gould's customers.

This rate competition on land and sea was followed by disastrous financial effects to the Western Union. In March, 1886, it passed its dividend. It was the threat of such an eventuality that led many of the small stockholders to appeal to Vanderbilt late in 1880 for protection. Cornelius Vanderbilt probably would have listened to no such complaint; he probably would have acted on the premises of sound business principles, as did Gould in 1886. Gould did not consult the temporary interests of the shareholders for an immediate dividend, but rather the permanent welfare of the company and the many years of dividends to come in the future. The 1886 annual report of the Western Union explained the reduction clearly. Said the report, "Whilst the volume of traffic has continued to increase, the tables show a material reduction in revenues, principally in the cable, gold and stock and commercial news earnings.... Notwithstanding continued reductions in rates, the earnings from land lines service have been well maintained, the falling off in earnings from messages transmitted over the land lines being less than the increase from wire rentals."[^024_51]

The rate wars had by the end of 1886 weakened the company's financial position. The company had during the years of the Gould regime substantially increased its fixed charges, while its earnings declined. The published earnings furthermore were overstated. Gould, as elsewhere, adopted an opportunistic bookkeeping system. When conditions demanded a showing of reduced earnings, he charged additions and improvements to operating expenses. With respect to the Western Union, it was to his interest in 1884 and 1885 to increase published earnings. He therefore provided an interesting "construction account" to which he charged items which were properly chargeable to operating expenses. In 1886 the account amounted to some $6,000,000.[^024_52]

In the period 1879 to 1886 the Western Union had increased its poles and wires by 100 per cent. The number of messages had increased about 75 per cent, and its gross revenue about 60 per cent. Expenses, however, had increased more than 100 per cent, thus reducing its profits nearly 20 per cent.[^024_53] This was the bill which the rate wars presented to the Western Union stockholders.

The future of Western Union as the year 1886 ended looked dark. In Congress another effort was being made to secure help from the government in the struggle against the dominant telegraph enterprise. Late in February the House ordered a committee to make an investigation and submit a report on legislation needed to prevent a telegraph monopoly.[^024_54] The Baltimore & Ohio continued to press the rate war on an increasing scale and rates dropped to record low levels. The Postal followed the lead of the Baltimore & Ohio. Rebates and discriminations were rife and special contracts with important customers became the normal order of the day.

The Baltimore & Ohio, however, was losing heavily not only in the telegraph but also in the express business. Although its railroad business was also declining, it still appeared to be an imposing financial enterprise. Since it had sold its stock for cash on a scale equaled only in railroad circles by the Pennsylvania, its stock was not watered. For years it had maintained dividend payments and built up a substantial surplus. Its past was excellent; its future appeared assured. Its stock sold at high prices and yielded only a small return on its market value.

These considerations appealed to many investors both in this country and abroad. The impaired strength of the company was not evident to those who read financial reports and who accept past records at their face value. Gould did not accept this test. As a man of business, he was an untiring investigator and close observer. He knew that the Baltimore & Ohio was losing heavily in the telegraph business and openly said so. He also knew that for some years the road's management had lived on past tradition. It was not aggressive; it had opened no new territory; it had not made satisfactory traffic agreements with its connections; and it had not, for a number of years, replaced its equipment and other property with new facilities.

Gould therefore used sound judgment in refusing to excite himself over the continued war of rates. He declined to make any move in order to buy out his competitor. In the summer of 1885 some meetings were arranged in London between Garrett and other telegraph men. It seemed that Robert S. Garrett, son of the elder Garrett, having seen Gould at work in the Atlantic & Pacific and in the American Union, desired to emulate him and to sell his telegraph property at a high price. He had, however, none of Gould's bargaining ability. His ideas of a selling price were fanciful, and nothing happened.[^024_55]

Gould refused to bid aggressively for the Baltimore & Ohio. Time was on his side. He waited for an offer, and the offer soon came. The Baltimore & Ohio management was anxious to sell. The weakened character of its management was revealed in the bungling procedure followed to find a buyer for the property. Henry Ives, a broker in New York City with no strong following and who had been involved in a number of irregularities, secured an option for the purchase of a large block of the Baltimore & Ohio stock. The stock was owned or controlled by the president of the property, Robert S. Garrett, who had built up the road. The existence of the option became a matter of public knowledge. Ives bought an option which he could not exercise. He did not have the means to conclude such a transaction, even though he may have made exaggerated representations to Garrett about his connections. Gould, however, was not so easily deceived. When Ives offered him the opportunity to buy the option, he declined. He did not have enough data on the finances of the Baltimore & Ohio, he declared. Neither did he know enough about its floating debt, the condition of its branch roads, and its relations with its connections.[^024_56] He had no opportunity to examine its books. Since his experience with accounting made him familiar with the tricks of that eminent art, he refused to make any commitments based upon the results of accounting without a thorough knowledge of its premises. Gould insisted that Ives had better buy the stock first and then he could do business with him.

Within a few days Gould was called upon by another person purporting to represent the anxious sellers of the Baltimore & Ohio stock. This time it was Alfred Sully,[^024_57] a financier of some note. He had mediated between the various groups of Reading security holders, and was generally credited with having made the reorganization of that road possible. Gould again refused to purchase.

Meanwhile the war of rates continued. Gould remained confident of the competitive position of the Western Union. Although the company paid no dividends its position in the industry was strong. The company, declared Gould about this time, had "withstood all competition and all opposition, and [had] grown stronger in spite of both."[^024_58] He did not, however, overlook the power of the Baltimore & Ohio. He watched Ives, who continued his plans for the acquisition of control of the road. Gould apparently encouraged him. He probably believed that if Ives with his scant resources would buy control on a shoestring, he would soon be compelled to unload his stock, and on a declining market he would be able to buy at low prices.

Ives, meanwhile, bought control of an important connection of the Baltimore & Ohio—the Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton. To secure and establish this control, Ives had borrowed extensively; partly, although indirectly, he had borrowed from Gould himself.[^024_59] Although he had not secured control of the Baltimore & Ohio, it seems that by mid-July he had entered into some sort of agreement by which he was given the opportunity to sell the company's telegraph lines and to use the cash proceeds for the purpose of making part payment on Baltimore & Ohio stock. With that payment made, he probably could borrow additional sums with the stock as collateral. In late July, Ives apparently made an offer to sell the telegraph lines to Gould for a cash consideration of $3,500,000. Gould after considering the offer rejected it. From a careful search, he learned that the Baltimore & Ohio had only two years before sold a bond issue payable in sterling, secured by a lien on railroad facilities and telegraph rights. Gould thus could not get a clear title, and refused to purchase.[^024_60] He was in no hurry to act. His patience and his refusal to become entangled in the adventures of promoters were justified by the public demonstration of the financial weakness of the Baltimore & Ohio. Its imposing book surplus turned out to be a financial mirage. It was invested in part in obsolete property, and included uncollectable advances to such subsidiaries as its own telegraph company. The debt of the latter to its parent approximated $3,875,000, although according to some reports the debt would reach $7,000,000.[^024_61] Suddenly the Baltimore & Ohio found itself begging for help, unable without outside assistance to carry its floating debt. Morgan, who had tied his business destiny to the maintenance of railroad stability, announced his intention of purchasing a large block of its securities. For the first time in many years the accounts of the road were made available to outsiders and the road's true condition thus revealed. Among the conditions precedent to the extension of financial help was the sale of the road's telegraph lines. In a swift and simple transaction the property was sold to the Western Union. The discussions were carried on between Morgan and Gould—two negotiators who were accustomed to making rapid decisions. Thus passed away the last powerful competitor, but one, of the Western Union.

The acquisition of the Baltimore & Ohio's telegraph system represented a milestone in the progress of the Western Union. The new addition was almost nation-wide in extent. The wires covered from Portland, Maine, to South Carolina, up to St. Paul, and down to Texas. The increase in its competitive strength facilitated negotiations for the purchase of a number of smaller telegraph enterprises. Including these additions, the Western Union succeeded in acquiring in one year, in mileage of lines and wire, a property about twice as great as the entire plant which any competing telegraph system ever controlled.[^024_62] Gould had succeeded in enhancing the competitive strength of the Western Union to such a degree that the Postal was relegated to an inferior status. Mackey, the man of business that he was, recognized that he could no longer indulge in rate wars with his powerful competitor, and he quickly proposed a truce. The Postal agreed with the Western Union to do away with the rebate system and to abolish the ten-to-fifteen-cent rate. The Western Union agreed not to cut rates against the Postal. There was no point in Gould's eliminating a competitor which would do the Western Union no harm. Each agreed to cultivate relationships on a service basis and on a given rate structure. The Postal by that time had extended its lines to serve many important cities, and through the part ownership by Mackey in the Atlantic cable, the Postal was enabled to give an efficient, well-rounded cable-telegraph service.[^024_63]

Agreement had thus been reached on the land-telegraph business. The two-way price system in the cable business lasted only about a year, and in September of 1887 the Commercial Cable finally cut its rate to the level of the Western Union's.[^024_64] It was not until July of 1888, approximately nine months after acquisition of the Baltimore & Ohio, that the cable rate war was settled and the way opened for a final peace agreement between the two remaining telegraph companies.

Gould was now master of the telegraph business. His success shocked both the commercial and the political world. A conservative financial daily described the Western Union as a concern which followed a "monopolizing and aggressive course...."[^024_65] Further aggressive efforts were made by the federal government to strike at the Western Union. The new Postmaster-General, the distinguished Philadelphia merchant, John Wanamaker, pressed for the adoption of an elaborate government postal telegraph system. Nothing, however, was done. Gould had successfully confounded legislative investigators, political critics, and financial skeptics. The watering of the Western Union stock in 1881 and the increase in fixed charges on the transatlantic cable lines convinced financial observers that it could not survive real competition. The aggressiveness of the Baltimore & Ohio seemed to seal its financial doom. It appeared that the Western Union would go the way of the Wabash, the Texas & Pacific, the Union Pacific, and the Erie. Gould would drain the treasury, surfeit its financial structure with bonds and stocks, and leave the company a financial derelict. He would then bid the enterprise good-by and look for greener financial pastures.

These rational expectations were all confounded by the succeeding events. Out of the Western Union, Gould made the greatest success of his career. His accounting as usual was questionable, and was resorted to on a major scale to help him out of speculative troubles in 1884 and 1885. He was aggressive in buying up competitors and paid the market price readily when necessary to eliminate powerful opposition which threatened to become more powerful. Thus he bought out the Mutual Union at a price dictated largely by the seller. Baker, in association with Morgan, was later to become one of the leaders of the banking community. He was the dominant factor in control of the Mutual Union, and later became a Gould admirer. Gould on the other hand was not aggressive in the purchase of the Baltimore & Ohio telegraph lines. In all cases he was realistic. He was aggressive at the proper time, and he was also patient and receptive in his negotiations at the proper time. He succeeded in buying or eliminating his competitors. By extraordinary means he excluded one competitor at no cost to the Western Union, and by ordinary measures, for cash or stock, he bought out others.

After elimination of all save one of his competitors, Gould was able to steer his Western Union away from the path of rate wars into the highway of rate stability and increased sales volume. In times of trouble the Western Union passed its dividends to conserve its resources, and in times of prosperity it resumed its dividends and achieved a strong investment rating for its securities. In the Western Union, Gould, contrary to expectations of contemporaries, critics, and friends alike, was a successful man of business.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXIII

[^024_1]: Testimony before Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads, on the Postal Telegraph, Report No. 577, Senate, 48th Congress, 1st Session, 1884, 246, Green.
[^024_2]: Known hereafter as the Mutual Union.
[^024_3]: This was the statement made in an advertisement in the New York Times, April 26, 1881.
[^024_4]: New York Times, Sept. 1, 1881.
[^024_5]: Phila. Press, Oct. 25, 1881. Wyman made this remark in a letter to the contractor's employees.
[^024_6]: Ibid.
[^024_7]: Literary Digest, Jan. 25, 1913, 190.
[^024_8]: New York Tribune, April 18, 1879.
[^024_9]: Ibid., Nov. 30, 1882.
[^024_10]: Bradstreet, May 27, 1882, 328.
[^024_11]: Ibid.
[^024_12]: New York Times, Nov. 7, 1882.
[^024_13]: Bradstreet, Jan. 6, 1883, 8.
[^024_14]: Burlington archives, Forbes to Perkins, Dec. 9, 1882.
[^024_15]: Ibid., Forbes to John W. Garrett, Dec. 15, 1882.
[^024_16]: Ibid., Forbes to George Jones, Dec. 10, 1882.
[^024_17]: Ibid., Forbes to Olney, Dec. 15, 1882.
[^024_18]: Ibid., Olney to Forbes, Dec. 20, 1882.
[^024_19]: Ibid., W. J. Ladd to Forbes, Dec. 20, 1882.
[^024_20]: For details on the importance of the Hannibal to the Burlington and of the competitive rivalry between Gould and the Burlington for acquisition of its control, see an unpublished manuscript by the author, "The Hannibal & St. Joseph, 1870-1883," in Newberry Library.
[^024_21]: Burlington archives, A. W. Beard to Forbes, March 25, 1883.
[^024_22]: Ibid., Potter to Perkins, Feb. 4, 1883.
[^024_23]: Chron., Nov. 15, 1882, 576; Dec. 2, 1882, 638.
[^024_24]: New York Times, Dec. 16, 1882.
[^024_25]: New York Tribune, Jan. 3, 1883.
[^024_26]: Testimony before the Senate Committee on Education and Labor as to the Relations between Labor and Capital, Report No. 1262, Senate, 48th Congress, 1885, 917, 2nd Session, Green.
[^024_27]: Known hereafter as the Postal.
[^024_28]: For details of the company's expansion plans, see Springfield (Mass.) Republican, cited in Ry. Review, April 2, 1881, 183.
[^024_29]: New York Times, letter from J. S. Moore, Jan. 14, 1887.
[^024_30]: In a letter of A. W. Dimock to the Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads, Senate, Feb. 15, 1884, in Testimony before Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads, on the Postal Telegraph, Report No. 577, Senate, 48th Congress, 1st Session, 1884, 163-4.
[^024_31]: Chron., Oct. 7, 1882, 393.
[^024_32]: Ibid., Aug. 18, 1883, 175.
[^024_33]: Boston Transcript, Aug. 22, 1883.
[^024_34]: New York Times, Feb. 5, 1884; Chron., Oct. 20, 1883, 424.
[^024_35]: New York Herald, Aug. 6, 1883.
[^024_36]: These quotations are taken from the text of the resolution presented in ibid., Feb. 21, 1884.
[^024_37]: Phila. Press, Jan. 30, 1884.
[^024_38]: New York Tribune, April 29, 1884.
[^024_39]: Testimony before Committee on Post Offices and Post Roads, on the Postal Telegraph, Report No. 577, Senate, 48th Congress, 1st Session, 1884, 130, R. Garrett.
[^024_40]: New York Herald, June 8, 1884.
[^024_41]: For the text of this contract, see Chron., June 14, 1884, 707.
[^024_42]: New York Times, July 18, 1884; New York Herald, July 19, 1884. This percentage, however, was challenged by an official of the Western Union. While the combination insisted that the miles of wires controlled amounted to one hundred and twenty thousand, a Western Union official declared that it controlled only sixty thousand miles.
[^024_43]: Iron Age, July 24, 1884, 17.
[^024_44]: Land-Grant Telegraph Lines, Report No. 3501, House of Representatives, 49th Congress, 2nd Session, 1886, 3, D. H. Bates.
[^024_45]: Ibid., 150-53, J. E. Johnston.
[^024_46]: New York Herald, July 14, 1885.
[^024_47]: New York Times, July 12, 1885.
[^024_48]: New York Herald, May 22, 1886.
[^024_49]: New York Times, Jan. 27, 1885.
[^024_50]: Accounts of the details of these proceedings are found in the New York Times, New York Tribune, and New York Herald, on various dates in July, 1885. Detailed accounts of the litigation initiated by the receiver of the Bankers' & Merchants' Telegraph for damages against the Western Union are found in New York Herald from May to July 1886. The New York Herald published in full the vivid and revealing addresses of counsel.
[^024_51]: Chron., Oct. 16, 1886, 458.
[^024_52]: Stockholder, Dec. 6, 1886.
[^024_53]: New York Tribune, Oct. 14, 1886.
[^024_54]: Military & Postal Telegraph, Report No. 178, House of Representatives, 50th Congress, 1st Session, 1888, III.
[^024_55]: On these negotiations, see Bradstreet, Aug. 1, 1885, 73; Aug. 8, 1885, 89; Aug. 15, 1885, 98.
[^024_56]: Phila. Press, March 13, 1887.
[^024_57]: Stockholder, March 16, 1887.
[^024_58]: Ibid., June 29, 1887.
[^024_59]: New York Tribune, June 25, 1887.
[^024_60]: Baltimore Sun, cited in Stockholder, July 27, 1887.
[^024_61]: Bradstreet, Oct. 15, 1887, 678.
[^024_62]: Annual report, Western Union, 1888, cited in Chron., Oct. 13, 1888, 439.
[^024_63]: For details on the settlement of the rate war between the Western Union and the Postal, see New York Herald, Oct. 28, 1887.
[^024_64]: Ibid., July 21, 1888.
[^024_65]: Journal of Commerce, cited in New York Herald, Oct. 18, 1887.