# Chapter XXIV - Gould Trades: To 1884

To the army of security holders, in the years following his association with the Erie, Gould's activities in corporate acquisitions, in acquiring and selling the control of railroad systems, in securing mastery of the telegraph combination and of the elevated rapid-transit system of New York City were subsidiary to his stock-market operations. Gould conducted his business negotiations during most of his business career with an eye on their stock-market effects. A success in business was not a finished product until it was also a success on the stock market. His trading operations in the seventies have already been surveyed. As a trader he was not, on the whole, successful. In 1878 he seriously misjudged the market. The price declines then reflected the selling of the nonimaginative investor who, upon seeing all the grave economic disasters, adjusts his mind and purse to the assumption that these conditions are permanent. Gould, as a security trader, could probably not be charged with committing such a sin, although his mind appeared to have been warped by a sense of futility over the impending resumption of specie payments, scheduled to go into effect January 1, 1879. He adjusted his trading policies to reflect that judgment. In the rising market of 1878 he made large short commitments, and his losses were heavy. By the end of 1878, and in the first few weeks of 1879, he had lost a large part of the speculative following, and his persistent critics considered him a lame duck. How he retrieved his financial losses and rose to a position of business supremacy has already been examined.[^025_1]

In the two years which followed, his interests veered to the business side and he became in a few months one of the leaders of the railroad industry. He bought numerous properties in a broad program not originally conceived as such, but gradually growing upon him, of acquiring working control of all of them.

In the course of time as the securities appreciated in value and as his paper profits grew to immense proportions, he resumed his position as a speculative trader. During these years he gave few public interviews, and much of what the newspapers and the financial press said about him was mere surmise. Gould did not want company. His speculative following in 1879 and 1880 was not of his own making. They grouped around him not because he beckoned but because they followed him naturally in pursuit of speculative profits. The speculators were to pay a high price in the subsequent three years for the profits made in the first three years.

By 1881 Gould had established his trading leadership; and his losses in 1878 were forgotten. Beginning with a cash fund which in February of 1879 (after the sale of the Union Pacific stock to the syndicate and the settlement for his losses on his short sales) probably did not exceed $3,000,000, Gould in the next two years established a fabric of market values for which there was at that time no equal in the country. His purchases were made in a rising market, the strongest since the Civil War inflation. The rise although not continuous, nevertheless created favorable conditions for the pyramiding of security purchases. The increase in the market value of each successive acquisition furnished the means for the purchase of more securities. The sensational advance in Wabash and in the Kansas City in the spring of 1879 created a market value which Gould utilized to finance the purchase of Kansas & Pacific and of additional blocks of Wabash. The heavy rise in the price of Kansas Pacific securities in the summer provided him with additional credit to secure funds for the purchase of the Denver Pacific bonds. His purchasing power was also increased by profits from construction companies and from Union Pacific dividends.

In the speculative boom of his southwestern securities, he made additional purchases. Although some of these acquisitions were made on a cash basis, there is little question that he depended heavily on bank credit. By 1881 he and his associates had acquired interests in the Mercantile Trust and were elected to the board. To the big three, Sage, Gould, and Dillon, board members, there was added Green of the Western Union, Humphreys of the Wabash, Marquand, a large stockholder in and a promoter of the International and of the Iron Mountain, and Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio. Although Gould's holdings in the stock of this bank were never "very large,"[^025_2] there is no doubt that part of his financial load was carried by this bank. Additional financial support came from stockbrokers with whom he transacted business. Since the market from 1879 to 1881 was advancing, there was no reason why stockbrokers should have denied him credit. Collateral loans grew ever more sound, and brokerage failures were few and far between. Gould in his urge for expansion did little to curtail his brokerage debts. It appears probable that until the summer of 1881 his time was so preoccupied with his amazing program that he had little time to watch the growth of his debit balances, and that he permitted himself to become over-expanded. Early in 1881, at about the time his purchase of the Western Union was consummated, he was still adding to his holdings. He had out-generaled Keene in the Western Union pool, and Keene had therefore joined with the bear contingent to depress the market. In this group was Smith, for almost ten years estranged from Gould, Addison Cammack, and C. H. Osborne. Keene was the unquestioned leader on the one side, and Gould on the other. "It [was] Keene against Gould, with their respective followings," remarked a contemporary observer.[^025_3]

Despite the dullness of the market, the Gould group permitted stories to spread of the profits to be made in the forthcoming market. Traders, in the language of one financial writer, "were apparently converted to the new belief (belief in higher prices) propounded by Jay Gould and Russell Sage, the high priests of the New deal."[^025_4]

By the end of April the market had responded little to the buying activities of Gould and other optimistic traders. Many indeed were disappointed and sold their stocks freely, while others who had bought Gould's securities remained hopeful. The boom in southwestern stocks began shortly thereafter. Price increases were large, and although the rise was confined to a short period, profits were such that Gould's program of exchanging the Iron Mountain for the Missouri Pacific and the International for the Kansas & Texas was an unqualified success.

Gould's tactics in promoting this move were sound, as they were in numerous other speculative tilts in the ensuing three years. These tactics made a deep impression upon the minds of contemporary observers, analysts, brokers, and traders. His general strategy, however, was unsound. He had overloaded himself with many stocks, and although in the early summer of 1881 he had substantial profits, they were largely on paper. Hardly had he completed his southwestern consolidation program than the booming market reached a climax. The assassination of President Garfield in July produced a sharp reaction and inaugurated a change in trend which was generally overlooked. Few observers recognized the break as the beginning of a three-year downward market. Said one writer, "Reactions are always liable to occur; but it really looks as if panics or even serious declines might almost be considered things of the past."[^025_5]

Gould had no opportunity to unload, to reduce his commitments, and to make himself unassailably solvent. In the early stages of the long decline, he set the pattern of his trading operations during the entire period. The break in prices was so sharp that reliable observers insisted that Gould was selling out as fast as possible; and some even believed that having foreseen the evil days, he had sold out his southwestern stocks and a good deal of his Western Union.[^025_6]

Gould, however, exercised no such foresight and displayed no such sound market judgment. Neither in word nor in deed did he reveal any comprehension of the changing business and economic trends. Who the sellers are at the end of a long buying wave has always remained unanswered, although this is not to say that the question never can be answered. Gould maintained his position as a leader of the group working for higher prices. It was a local and limited action not indicative of a change in mind, nor revealing any recognition of the change in economic forces. Late in December the market suffered another drop. Although Gould was probably next to Vanderbilt the largest holder of railroad securities in the country, he was accused of being the author of the break. Since the majority of traders were as usual operating for the rise, and since almost all investors were anxious to see the prices of their securities rise uninterruptedly, blame for the losses inflicted on thousands of security holders who were seeking a scapegoat was placed upon the shoulders of Gould. "The immediate cause," (for the market break) declared one financial reporter, was given in a monosyllable, "'Gould.'"[^025_7]

The sense of exaggerated power credited to Gould at this time was widespread. Perhaps some of the remarks of financial journalists may be pardoned in an effort to build up reader interest at a time when other financial events were lacking. There must nevertheless have been deep feeling behind the following expressions which refer to the sharp market break in December, 1881, when Gould played his trick on the Denver stock: "It was a striking instance of the immense power which one man can exercise. Jay Gould has done more in a single week, without the aid of a solitary bear event or disaster, than all the Vanderbilts, Mills, Cammacks, Keenes, Sages and Osbornes were able to accomplish with the assistance of an assassination, a change of administration, a tight money market, a railroad war, a short crop, a drought, and a flood, so long as the little dark man was not in sympathy with them."[^025_8]

The feeling of hostility to Gould as a wrecker of values was accentuated. Traders awaited word from him before determining their market position. Following his signal to buy or sell, many journals of opinion and chroniclers of events renewed their attacks upon the integrity of his statements. When Gould proclaimed that he was in favor of lower prices, observers concluded that he was anxious to buy stocks cheap, and when he proclaimed himself in favor of higher prices, they concluded that he wanted to sell out his holdings. In truth, except for occasional market forays, he was for most of 1881 and the early months of 1882 on the rising side of the market. Meanwhile, the prices of his major holdings—Missouri Pacific and Western Union—dropped sharply. Early in February, 1882, therefore, he announced in a formal statement that he was now a buyer of stocks. "It was a rather sudden turn—sudden enough, indeed, to take one's breath away; but we are getting used to that," was the remark of the editor of one of the more conservative journals.[^025_9] To elevate the general list and therefore his own Missouri Pacific and Western Union, Gould had formed an understanding with Keene and some other operators. Despite his great need, the time set for a rising movement was not propitious. A panic threatened in Paris and many operators who had joined their interests with Gould sold out and left him almost alone in the field. In the face of adverse European news, the export of gold and the rise in money rates, together with the short sales by some market traders, Gould almost singly held up the market "as it were, by main strength."[^025_10]

Gould far from being a wrecker of existing values was now on the defensive in supporting such values. He was a leader in fact of a group struggling for higher security prices. In this effort, he was for many weeks unsuccessful. The market throughout the most of February and early March was in a turmoil. The attack on Wabash was particularly heavy. The sharp break reached a climax in mid-February, and again Gould traced the pattern which was gradually becoming familiar to many close observers, of holding up the price of Missouri Pacific and Western Union, while doing little to maintain the prices of his other securities.

Another sharp selling wave on the twenty-third of February was sufficiently extensive to encourage Gould to repeat publicly that he was on the side of higher prices. The last decline, he said, was "without reason; the sacrifice of stocks foolish...."[^025_11] It is apparent that Gould's advice at least to some extent was generally followed, and for a few days the market was again stabilized. By the beginning of the second week in March, however, prices again buckled. By the end of the week the situation looked serious to those who had large lines of stocks to carry on borrowed money.

That the situation was disturbing to Gould, there is little reason to doubt. Over the week end, therefore, he conceived another plan, unprecedented in scope and effective in execution. On Monday morning he called a group of friends to his office and displayed $53,000,000 (par) of stock certificates taken from his vaults. They were not, Gould explained, used as collateral for loans; they were free treasury assets. The collection was worth more than $40,000,000 at market prices, as collateral he could use them to borrow $30,000,000. Reports were that Gould had another $20,000,000 which he did not exhibit. Despite the fact that he was forced to sustain the value of his holdings, it was again insisted that he was still for the most part a trader.... "For no one in the slightest degree acquainted with Wall Street imagines in his wildest dreams that Mr. Gould has them (his securities) to keep as permanent investment, or for any other purpose than to sell."[^025_12]

His motive, however, was simple and obvious. There is little doubt that Gould exhibited his securities to convince the public that he was not selling. Gould's tactics proved successful and the exhibit was followed by a market stampede. The market moved upward and a part of Gould's paper losses were recovered.[^025_13] This tactical advance engineered by Gould exhausted itself in a few weeks. The Gould leadership was strong and the financial community excited. Aside from a venture into Northern Pacific on the short side, a move to which he was to return some months later in the spring of 1883, he did little in the market for the remainder of the year. His operations during this period were a puzzle to the financial community. He concealed his plans well; his own brokers knowing nothing of what he was doing.[^025_14] The general market resumed the decline which Gould had interrupted by his March coup. Though the selling was not as heavy as it had been in the initial break from July, 1881, to March, 1882, it was persistent and in the course of months the erosion of values was serious. It is probable that in the late months of 1882 Gould accumulated additional lines of stocks. By the middle of January, 1883, he publicly announced his adherence to the rising side of the market,[^025_15] and privately he talked about restoring confidence, which presumably meant a rising stock market.[^025_16] A few weeks later when Union Pacific was selling at 95 he bought a large block at private sale,[^025_17] and a few days thereafter he announced that he had a "moderate interest" in Union Pacific.[^025_18] At about this time the rate situation was stabilized. Although the Burlington had been in Denver for more than six months, the threat of a rate war had not materialized. Gould consequently believed that what he called a "moderate interest" in Union Pacific would probably prove a profitable commitment.

At the same time he increased his holdings in Western Union. According to Green, president of the company, Gould's holdings since the merger had advanced from $20,000,000 to $30,000,000. "Indeed," remarked Green, "I know that [Gould] has not got any other stock that he prizes so highly."[^025_19]

The problem of the Wabash was meanwhile becoming burdensome. To retain the road as an integral part of his southwestern system, he was compelled to buy large blocks of stock. Even these purchases could not long sustain the market, and by the middle of May the market again began to decline. He learned at about that time that the war of rates, which had just begun because of the completion of the Denver's Ogden extension, would be extended and that this would lead to a slash in Union Pacific's earnings. Gould apparently then sold out his small amount of Union Pacific and assumed a short position in the market; becoming, in the words of one of his newspaper critics, "the most active, persistent and formidable bear on Union Pacific of all the crowd of speculators...."[^025_20]

It remained difficult, as it had for almost two years, for him to sell any substantial part of his holdings. His knowledge of the inside forces of the market, his mastery of market technique, his wide understanding of security distribution, his ease of securing credit, his command of the large speculative following upon whom from time to time he could unload some of his securities, were of little use to him. All of these factors are of importance only if one is in accord with the trend of underlying economic forces. His unsound strategy was his major error, and from it came most of his trading losses. In the summer of 1883 he first undertook seriously to dispose of some of his holdings. For the first time since the beginning of the decline he appears to have observed that prices were on the downward march, and that it was necessary in order to solve some of his pressing financial problems to undertake some heroic measures. He was then, as one observer remarked, "plainly in a more uncomfortable position than it [was] usually his luck to get into."[^025_21] A circular of a leading broker, and a close Gould follower, referred to his desire "to realize as best he [might] upon large amounts of securities in which he [was] interested."[^025_22]

Vanderbilt also was faced with heavy paper losses on his large holdings in eastern railroad securities. Leading Vanderbilt stocks had taken such a severe price drubbing that Vanderbilt sought the aid of Gould in maintaining price levels. Both were so loaded, however, that the proposed joint action appeared to one banker like the "blind leading the blind."[^025_23]

Gould was now convinced that the market would continue to decline. It should not be surprising that under these circumstances calling for general liquidation, Gould adopted a contradictory trading policy. While he was heavily long of stocks which he was holding permanently, he was short of others. Early in August the price of Wabash, Texas & Pacific and Kansas & Texas dropped sharply, though the most serious was the break in Western Union. Ever since Gould had acquired a large interest late in 1880, he had succeeded in keeping the price above 80, but in the summer of 1883 the stock was forced to new low levels. His satellite stocks also dropped to new lows, and it was therefore no wonder that he could state with some semblance of sincerity early in September that the market could not be "cheaper than at present."[^025_24]

Though by now Gould must have been convinced that the market could not advance, he could do little to liquidate his holdings. He was hesitant about selling his Wabash for fear that control of the property might be captured by adverse railroad interests and since his holdings in Texas & Pacific and Kansas & Texas were not substantial, their liquidation would be of little help. Gould was indeed fearful for the first time in his business career of disposing of his holdings in his major properties—the Missouri Pacific, the Western Union, and the Manhattan. Although observers did not recognize the fact, he was anxious to become a businessman in his own standing. He was therefore unable to assume the bold speculative leadership necessary to take full advantage of the downward trend in the security markets. This responsibility was taken by a trader of whom mention has already been made, Woerishoffer, who soon became "the great bear king of Wall Street."[^025_25] One is tempted to say that the task of leading the bear traders was not one of any exceptional risk, since the forces operating for a decline were so obvious that profits on the short side were almost inevitable. That of course is hindsight reasoning. To many informed people, writers and actors in the business drama who lived through the eight or nine months preceding the sharp financial breakdown in the early summer of 1884, the trend was not so clear. According to a leading metropolitan newspaper, indeed, except for the silver question, "the dangers of a commercial or financial panic [had been] well passed."[^025_26] Some months later, shortly before the financial revulsion of May, Vanderbilt, who was in a position to reflect the opinions of influential businessmen, remarked that it was foolish to sell stocks. All large institutions, he declared late in March, 1884, hold some dividend paying stocks, and he added, apparently in an off-hand way, perhaps bonds, too. Trust companies and savings banks are buying stocks and carrying them. "A person is a fool to sell," he said.[^025_27]

Gould by the force of circumstances, paradoxical though it may appear to be, was for a time forced to assume the leadership of the forces operating for a rise in the market. He was not prepared to envisage the possibility of a panic. Although he recognized that it was essential to liquidate and to reduce his heavy loans, he recognized, also, that before he could liquidate it was necessary for securities to rise. By the fall of 1883 he had been unable to sell much of his 50,000 shares of Wabash, and he declared about a month later that he never owned more Wabash than he did then.[^025_28]

The stock market continued to falter in January, 1884. Gould, contrary to his policy of silence followed in the years of accumulation between 1879 and 1881, became decidedly voluble. If he were handling the Union Pacific, he declared, he would advance it 15 per cent on the faith of the Tri-Partite agreement. "The stock," he declared further, "[is] very cheap, and will doubtless go up."[^025_29] This statement was followed by a sharp decline in prices. Days later, after his views were widely publicized, additional buying came in and the Union Pacific rose to $80 a share. Within a week however the buying gradually fell off and the general list which had moved ahead cautiously in the wake of the Union Pacific's spurt was demoralized by a break of the West Shore bonds and the receivership of the North River Construction Company. This latter was the company whose stock represented the profits realizable, if any, from the building of the West Shore. Prices retreated rapidly and soon sank to new low levels since the lows of the seventies. Meanwhile Gould's financial obligations were growing heavier. Trust companies were reported to be calling loans, and Gould was obliged to look for additional accommodation abroad where, according to press reports, he secured a collateral sterling loan of £250,000.[^025_30] His solvency depended upon his ability to maintain the market value of his Western Union and Missouri Pacific in which his holdings remained large. The price of the former had declined, though not in proportion to the decline in the general list; Gould maintaining its price, as one observer remarked, "with a grasp of iron."[^025_31] The terms of his loans became ever more stringent. The collateral was marked down substantially below the market price, at least 25 per cent. Some loans gave the creditors the right to lend the collateral, and when Gould discovered that some of it was being lent to traders to facilitate their short sales, he hurried to pay off those particular loans.

The January market rise proved to be abortive, and again Gould resorted to issuing public statements. Before the end of the month, he insisted publicly that good stocks and bonds were selling below their value. "Shrewd moneyed men are buying them...." Stocks were oversold and cornered. Such stocks, he declared, included the Union Pacific, Western Union and the Vanderbilt stocks, among others. The Wabash, he said, was improving and its financial condition was better than a year ago. The market, he continued, would soon advance. Once, he said, he had bought Northwestern at 14, and in eighteen months it had sold above par.[^025_32]

Whatever effect these public outpourings may have had on the speculative public, they did disclose to the sophisticated trader the seriousness of his financial condition. No accumulation of securities can be normally carried out in a floodlight of publicity. This breaking of Gould's policy of silence which had characterized his major operations must have revealed his grave financial position to Woerishoffer and to the other major traders. Gould was on the alert for every selling opportunity, superintending his trading operations through financial news agencies and an army of brokers estimated in some quarters to exceed two hundred, who reported to him instantly the buyers and sellers of stocks. "No such minute supervision of the dealings [had] ever been known,"[^025_33] remarked one writer.

He even took occasion to threaten suit, which again was something new. Expressing irritation over the spread of rumors, he declared that if they were traced to their source, the grand jury would be invoked.[^025_34] A few days later he declared that he had placed in his lawyer's hands material which would facilitate the prosecution of those who were spreading gossip about his financial embarrassment.[^025_35] Little attention was paid to these threats. The feeling of pessimism was intensified by a resumption of the heavy decline in the Villard stocks. Suddenly, the entire stock market reversed its trend and moved upward, the rise being led by the weakest stocks. On one day late in January, the price of Oregon Railway & Navigation opened at 88, and then moved upward to 119. A large supply was then rushed to the market and the price broke sharply to 95. The upward twist elevated the Union Pacific, for which Gould was seeking a market. On a Saturday morning almost 25 per cent of the turnover of 665,000 shares was represented by the Union Pacific, and in a week's time its price advanced from 76 to 82.

The market flare-up was a characteristic trading stroke of Gould. It was carried out as part of the negotiations with an embarrassed company which agreed to make a contract on hard bargaining terms, in order to get essential funds to avoid financial disaster. The Oregon Transcontinental's maturing loan of $1,500,000, was secured by collateral in the hands of traders who were operating on the side of lower prices. They expected the debtor to sell the securities in order to pay the loan; the resultant decline would enable them to cover their line of short stocks. Or probably, they were counting upon accepting payment of their loans in collateral and not in cash. These securities were attractive, moreover, to an interest other than Gould. Forbes, who had made large commitments in Villard securities both personally and for the account of the Burlington, had planned to come to the support of the company.[^025_36] Gould, however, acted more decisively. Through a syndicate he raised $4,000,000 and advanced sufficient funds to pay the loan. The concern then requested the creditors, who were selling stock short, to return the collateral. The traders were forced to enter the market to get the stock, and Gould no doubt helped things along by buying some shares for quick sale. This new advance was also short-lived. It did not enable him to liquidate much of his major holdings, though his victory in this limited engagement must have yielded him substantial profits.

After trapping these traders Gould stepped aside for a few days and awaited results. Little additional outside buying came in, and the market again turned dull. Gould then made another move. He decided once more to intervene in the eastern railroad situation in an effort to settle the existing rate wars, and soon succeeded in arranging a meeting of eastern railroad presidents on the seventh day of February. Each railroad president, personally, declared that railroad rates would be maintained. This settlement opened up vistas of railroad prosperity.

Gould now lined up a strong buying contingent, including Vanderbilt, the holder of perhaps the largest supply of liquid funds. On the very day of the meeting of the railroad presidents, Vanderbilt was buttonholed by a newspaper reporter. The bull market, he said was going to last; the stocks were not in Wall Street, and he, himself, had been buying for two weeks. New York Central, Lake Shore and Northwestern were cheap. New York Central particularly, he said, was even better than United States Government bonds. "In a year or two, we may have no Government. We must have railroads."[^025_37] This may seem a curious statement, coming from one reported to be the largest single holder of government bonds. It was nevertheless a reflection of the confidence then, and for many years thereafter, entertained in good railroad securities. About a quarter of a century later another businessman, Henry Clay Frick, declared in a similar moment of exuberance that railroad bonds were the Rembrandts of investment. Vanderbilt also paid his respects to the bears; ... "their doom [was] sealed,"[^025_38] he said.

Gould also convinced Field, who was especially impressed by his Oregon Transcontinental coup. "I don't know of anything else," he declared, "that is hanging over the stock market except possibly the West Shore matters, and I am told that they are in a fair way of adjustment.... I really believe that the tide is turning;..."[^025_39]

This array of financial leadership was enough to turn the market in February. For three weeks prices moved ahead slowly but with no rampant advances in any particular stock. There was no evidence of artificiality, except perhaps the Lackawanna, whose price appeared so firmly held that a corner appeared almost inevitable. Late in February, as the market turned dull, Gould decided upon another venture. He was then one of the leading stockholders of the Lackawanna, owning probably about 70,000 shares.[^025_40] Market operations in the stock were conducted by Stephen Van Cullen White, Deacon White, as he was generally known, an active, plunging trader, and like so many traders who had no qualifications as men of business other than their ability to plunge heavily in the face of grave risks and market uncertainties, he eventually lost his fortune in an attempt to corner a commodity. Now at the top of his business career, he was in the midst of a successful market operation in Lackawanna, his second successful move to corner the stock in little more than a year. Late in February, White joined with Gould, Sage, and Sloan in conjunction with others to form a pool in the stock with himself as manager. By the first of March, the market became aware that the stock was again cornered. A gap of about $10 per share developed between the price for regular delivery and the price for cash. The latter represented the price which short traders had to pay in order to secure a supply of stocks to make delivery immediately in response to the call from those who owned the stock. Although Gould's association with the pool cannot be stated as a definite fact,[^025_41] the rise in the stock was nevertheless an important factor in his liquidation program.

The rapid rise in Lackawanna, even though it appeared to be artificial, temporarily stemmed the process of liquidation; though after the advance promoted by the corner the list again turned dull. The floating supply of stock, the supply available for trading, was reduced. Though it was conceded that Gould and Sage were holding up prices by "brute force," it was clear that some real support was coming in from investment demand. It was about this time that Vanderbilt in declaring his confidence in the future of the market insisted that institutions were buying. Though Vanderbilt was using his "spare" money, as he declared it, to sustain his own stocks, he was cautious and insisted that he did not intend to "run unnecessarily in debt."[^025_42] Gould's trading prestige was also gradually returning, and his position was again described in extravagant language. "He is," declared one source, "undeniably the most potent person in the speculative ranks."[^025_43]

Gould felt satisfied with the market and left for Florida for a vacation. The liquidation of securities, however, had by no means been stopped. Savings banks and other financial institutions which had bought stocks were awaiting, as indeed Gould himself was, for a good market on which to sell. Still the market did not rise. The dullness was broken by a sharp break in the price of wheat and, among Gould's stocks, Western Union by the first of April broke below 70. It was still a 7 per cent stock, and a return of 10 per cent on such an investment seemed to some to be "ridiculous."[^025_44] By mid-April prices were dropping sharply and Gould's southwestern stocks had been reduced to the level of speculations. His finances were so weakened that he no longer had the power to sustain even his Western Union. By early May its price broke to 60, and the price of Missouri Pacific to 80, while the Wabash stocks, both common and preferred, had almost no value. Under the force of pressure from creditors and brokers he had no alternative to liquidation. He was selling as a speculator caught with insufficient margin.

The final panic break was, as usual, accompanied by a number of specific events. First was the failure of the Marine Bank, and of Grant & Ward. This was followed by the collapse of the Metropolitan National Bank, whose president, G. I. Seney, had made a fortune by his timely sale of Nickel Plate stock to Vanderbilt. The effect of the market break upon the value of Gould's stocks was severe. Missouri Pacific dropped from 78 to 68, Union Pacific from 45 to 39, and Western Union from 54 to 49. Earlier in the year Western Union had sold at 80. Thirty points on his holdings of $40,000,000 of Western Union meant a drop of $12,000,000 in the collateral supporting his debts.

Woerishoffer and the other bear traders now delivered a savage attack against the Gould stocks. It was at this time that Connor proved his loyalty to Gould when he stood in the breach and bought thousands of shares of Western Union. Woerishoffer, Cammack, and Smith staked their existence on Gould's downfall. Connor is said to have bought a block of 10,000 shares of Western Union several times within an hour,[^025_45] and Gould was said to have bought 30,000 shares in three hours.[^025_46] Profits of the bear traders were heavy. It was estimated for example that Smith, Gould's former associate and reputed to be the largest trader in Western Union, realized a profit of $500,000.[^025_47]

Gould's position was critical. His debts were heavy and his collateral suspected. It is probable that in the last two weeks of May the stock of the Missouri Pacific which sold at a low of just above 60 did not have collateral value at the banks of more than 20; while other southwestern rails, Texas & Pacific, Kansas & Texas, and Wabash, were worthless for collateral purposes. His Western Union under the prevailing conditions probably did not have a collateral value of more than 25 or 30. Had his loans been called he probably would have been unable to pay.

In the midst of these difficulties a rumor spread that the Fourth National Bank had called a large loan on Gould, and had sold the collateral which happened to be the Missouri Pacific stock.[^025_48] The price of Missouri Pacific dropped and it appeared for a time that there were no bids, but the decline was finally halted just above 60. Gould's position steadily grew more acute. Another of his major assets suitable for collateral, the stock of the Western Union, would probably be affected by a competitive situation which was then just reaching a head. The Baltimore & Ohio Telegraph was laying plans to complete a pooling agreement with two major competitors of the Western Union. It would not be at all surprising that under those conditions additional selling by frightened holders would drive the Western Union even below its current record low price of $50 a share.

Gould's critics were quick to recognize his impaired position, and for the first time since he rose to business power in 1879, they were able to anticipate with some degree of probability his coming collapse. "Is the load which Gould is carrying too heavy for him?"[^025_49] asked one editor. Despite his heavy loans it was declared that he might be forced to borrow more, in default of which it would be necessary to throw over his Western Union and his other shares, "for whatever they would bring."[^025_50] The other New York City leading journalistic critic asserted that the bear traders had finally reduced Gould to a position of impotence. "An impartial view of the present crisis of his securities, would indicate that the boys had not only got him under, but were walking up and down on his prostrate form."[^025_51]

Gould had been defeated as a trader in a long speculative bout lasting about three years. During this period he had at times made heavy trading profits, though his losses far outbalanced his gains. His position at this time was not substantially different from what it had been at the end of 1878. In the ensuing three years he had become a major factor in the business world. His investment had increased to a peak where, with the exception of Vanderbilt, it was greater than that of any man in the country. A fair estimate would give him a dividend and an interest income of about $6,000,000 a year. And yet his trading activities appeared now about to drive him into insolvency, and at a time when his investment income was not seriously endangered. Although he had no income from his heavy holdings in his Wabash and Texas & Pacific, he still had a return of about 6 per cent on about $40,000,000 of Western Union and 7 per cent on about $12,000,000 of Missouri Pacific. He was also credited with bond holdings of about $8,000,000 in Iron Mountain, $6,000,000 in Texas & Pacific, and $5,000,000 in Kansas & Texas, together with miscellaneous bonds of about $9,000,000. He also had industrial dividend-paying properties including the profitable stock of the St. Louis Bridge.

In May of 1884, nevertheless, his speculative activities had brought him to the brink of disaster. He was indeed, as Connor said more than a year later, "in deep water."[^025_52] In this hour of need his friends failed him, and he decided to ask help from his enemies. While his friends failed him, his foes rescued him. He called a meeting of his foes—the bear traders, led by Woerishoffer—who were short of Missouri Pacific and Western Union. As early as February the short interest in Western Union had been estimated at about 100,000 shares.[^025_53] Because of his heavy debts, estimated by one of his biographers at $20,000,000,[^025_54] it was impossible for Gould to raise funds to force up the price of Western Union and Missouri Pacific, and thus force the shorts to cover. Gould decided to follow the philosophy of Samson: if he had to go down he would at the same time break his adversaries. Bringing a copy of an assignment to the meeting, he declared that unless the traders made an agreement with him, then and there, he would announce the next day that he was unable to meet his engagements. This is the same kind of threat which Cornelius Vanderbilt adopted in 1868, at a time when his large block of Erie stock had lost its value as collateral. When the banks threatened to call his loans, secured by the Erie, he threatened to sell his New York Central.

Gould's scheme was successful, and in this moment of desperation he revealed his superiority as a man of courage and resourcefulness, even though he revealed himself also as an unsuccessful trader. He was a success in business negotiations, though a failure in security trading.

The short traders needed the Western Union stock to deliver on their short contracts in order to realize their paper profits in Western Union. By selling the short traders the 50,000 Western Union, Gould obtained the sorely needed cash. What Sage, Vanderbilt, and his other friends could not give him, what the banks were unable to give him even if they were so inclined, his foes readily gave him. His enemies were certain that he would fail; the help thus extended to him would, in the opinion of these traders, "be transient in its effects as a glass of brandy given to a dying man."[^025_55]

Gould now not only had ready cash; he also had a large interest in Missouri Pacific. Including the holdings of Sage, Marquand, and his other allies, he controlled a large proportion of the stock. The way was, therefore, open for a corner. With this large supply of cash, so generously supplied by his short-selling opponents, Gould found no difficulty in booming the price of Missouri Pacific, and within a few days the price leaped upward to the middle seventies. The traders who had just covered their Western Union and were still short of Missouri Pacific were panic-stricken. They competed in the market with Gould's purchases, and it took only a small part of Gould's newly found millions to force the stock up to par. By the middle of June Missouri Pacific was cornered, the short traders were routed, and Gould, unable in May to sell any Missouri Pacific in the sixties, was able in July to sell large amounts in the nineties.

Gould by shrewd personal negotiations had thus saved himself and had restored his finances. There is, nevertheless, some doubt that the traders, led by Woerishoffer with whom Gould made the Western Union deal, had permitted themselves to become the victims of Gould's market tactics. It is just as probable that Gould convinced them that there would be more profit on the up rather than on the down side of the market; that with these funds on hand, Gould could put the market up and that they could then buy and participate in the profits.[^025_56]

Whatever the fact, the effect upon Gould's position was clear. He was now at least solvent, though his solvency was by no means assured. His loans were still heavy and even in the first week in June, after Missouri Pacific had crossed the middle eighties, reports stated with considerable confidence that Gould was still borrowing on collateral at the rate of 2 per cent a month.[^025_57] In the weak market of the following two weeks, the price of Western Union and Union Pacific remained depressed and their collateral value at the banks was substantially below their market value. Even after the sharp rise in Missouri Pacific, Gould's finances were, therefore, still strained and he was compelled to borrow further. His critics were still jubilant, and to one of them Gould seemed "to be following fast in the footsteps of Mr. Villard, and hastening toward the same termination—namely, a grand collapse."[^025_58]

In early July there was a widespread belief that his insolvency had only been delayed, and financial institutions rushed to deny any connection with him. When it was reported that Kidder, Peabody & Co. had extended a $2,000,000 credit to Gould, the report was denied. The Mercantile Trust on whose board Gould had served for a number of years hastened to announce that it had no loans with him, and early in July he retired from the directorate.

Gould meanwhile stuck grimly to his task. He was confronted with many perplexing problems in these dark and dreary days. By a show of resourcefulness, of bold and skillful use of his securities and by the manipulation of his leading stocks in the market, he was able to command sufficient cash to pay off his most pressing obligations. Unlike Villard in the previous summer he did not hold on to every bit of property and go down quiescently with the decline in their market value. He had resources, in shrewdness of personal dealings, in the thoroughness of his knowledge of market technique, and in his ability to engage in successful tactical operations which Villard did not have. Gould survived the supreme crisis in May of 1884. His securities were restored to a position of bankable collateral and his personal position was relieved.

By the middle of July, he had succeeded in increasing the price of his Missouri Pacific; although further efforts to elevate the price of his other securities and to liquidate a part of his collateral had been stopped by the break in late June. By early July he was busy laying plans for another market program to ease his financial stringency. In a public statement, he declared that money was growing easy. Security prices, he continued, were "ridiculously low."[^025_59]

The market resumed its advance in the third week of July under the leadership of the Missouri Pacific and the Lackawanna. The leadership, however, soon switched to the Union Pacific, and by early August the stock market was "in a raging fever of advance...."[^025_60] While the general list advanced between 8 and 10 per cent, the price of Union Pacific rose daily with almost mechanical regularity until by the end of August its price had almost doubled.

How much Union Pacific Gould was able to unload is not known. On top of the boom, he said, he had not been selling stock; in fact, he insisted, he was buying and that he expected to see the price "much higher."[^025_61] Suddenly, within a day or so thereafter, the price of Union Pacific declined. Gould now learned that some large interests were selling out, including Tilden, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1876.

The break in Union Pacific in late August proved to be the end of the summer rise. As much as any other market in the history of his business career, this was one of Gould's own making. He made the market for Missouri Pacific from late May till mid-June, and also for Union Pacific from early July to late August. He had now accomplished what he had set out to do; he had liquidated enough of his holdings to pay some part of his debts and to relieve the pressure of his creditors.

Gould was now a changed man—physically and mentally. The horrors of his financial and trading experiences in the summer months had overtaxed his physical and nervous energies, and in the years following he could no longer keep up the same ceaseless grind on so many active business fronts. His experience had also changed his financial outlook. When he had finished with the summer markets, he declared he would no longer borrow money for speculation.[^025_62] He had by this time learned a lesson which others had learned in the same way—apparently the only way in which lessons of this kind are taught, by repeated instruction in the school of experience. Scott of the Pennsylvania in the middle seventies, Stanford in the early eighties, and Huntington in the middle nineties were others who after long experience decided to remain no longer in debt.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXIV

[^025_1]: See Chapters IX-XVII.
[^025_2]: This is the language used in the New York Times, July 15, 1884, by Louis Fitzgerald, president of the Mercantile Trust, at a time when the bank was seriously criticized because of its close association with Gould, and when there was reasonable probability of losses to the bank from Gould's paper. For this reason perhaps Fitzgerald's belittling of Gould's holdings cannot be accepted as entirely reliable.
[^025_3]: Bradstreet, Feb. 5, 1881, 72.
[^025_4]: Phila. North American, Feb. 14, 1881.
[^025_5]: Ibid., July 20, 1881.
[^025_6]: Bradstreet, Aug. 20, 1881, 120.
[^025_7]: Phila. North American, Dec. 21, 1881.
[^025_8]: Ibid., Dec. 23, 1881.
[^025_9]: Bradstreet, Feb. 4, 1882, 72.
[^025_10]: Ibid.
[^025_11]: New York Commercial Advertiser, Feb. 24, 1882.
[^025_12]: Bradstreet, March 18, 1882, 168.
[^025_13]: A commentator writing many years later, presumably from memory, or upon the basis of remarks made by others to him from their own memory, remarked that Gould in January was short of pretty much the entire list; and that Gould made a trading profit by covering his stocks. Wall Street Journal, June 12, 1924. There may be some truth in this statement. The trading profits he may have made, however, represented an infinitesimal part of the paper profits he realized from the later advance in the bulk of his permanent holdings, primarily Missouri Pacific, Western Union and Manhattan.
[^025_14]: This is the judgment of a New York correspondent of the Phila. Press, Nov. 13, 1882.
[^025_15]: Phila. North American, Jan. 16, 1883.
[^025_16]: Burlington archives, Perkins to Forbes, Jan. 20, 1883.
[^025_17]: Phila. North American, Feb. 12, 1883.
[^025_18]: New York Times, Feb. 15, 1883.
[^025_19]: Phila. North American, Feb. 24, 1883.
[^025_20]: New York Times, June 10, 1883.
[^025_21]: Bradstreet, Aug. 25, 1883, 120.
[^025_22]: Circular of Henry Clews & Co., cited in Ry. Review, Aug. 4, 1883, 459.
[^025_23]: Burlington archives, Griswold to Forbes, Feb. 14, 1883.
[^025_24]: Phila. North American, Sept. 3, 1883.
[^025_25]: So designated in the Phila. Press, Oct. 8, 1883.
[^025_26]: New York Tribune, Oct. 16, 1883.
[^025_27]: New York Times, March 27, 1884.
[^025_28]: Phila. North American, Nov. 23, 1883.
[^025_29]: Ibid., Jan. 7, 1884.
[^025_30]: Ibid., Jan. 21, 1884.
[^025_31]: Bradstreet, March 1, 1884, 136.
[^025_32]: Phila. Press, Jan. 23, 1884.
[^025_33]: Ibid., Feb. 4, 1884.
[^025_34]: Iron Age, Jan. 24, 1884, 19.
[^025_35]: New York Tribune, Jan. 23, 1884.
[^025_36]: Burlington archives, Perkins to Forbes, Jan. 29, 1884.
[^025_37]: New York Times, Feb. 7, 1884.
[^025_38]: Ibid.
[^025_39]: New York Tribune, Jan. 29, 1884.
[^025_40]: In denying that he sold any of the stock in this road, Gould declared he owned 73,000 shares. Railroad Herald, March 18, 1884, 17.
[^025_41]: New York Tribune, Sept. 23, 1891, states definitely that Gould supported White in his original Lackawanna ventures.
[^025_42]: New York Times, March 27, 1884.
[^025_43]: Bradstreet, March 29, 1884, 200.
[^025_44]: This is the adjective used by the New York Tribune, April 2, 1884, in characterizing the drop in Western Union.
[^025_45]: This is the statement of a financial reporter in the Phila. Press of July 21, 1891, some years after the event.
[^025_46]: Ibid., Jan. 20, 1888.
[^025_47]: Phila. North American, May 16, 1884.
[^025_48]: Phila. Press, May 21, 1884; Phila. North American, May 21, 1884.
[^025_49]: New York Herald, May 24, 1884.
[^025_50]: Ibid., May 27, 1884.
[^025_51]: New York Times, May 25, 1884.
[^025_52]: Phila. Press, Nov. 30, 1885.
[^025_53]: Phila. North American, Feb. 25, 1884.
[^025_54]: Murat Halstead and J. Frank Beale, Jr.: Life of Jay Gould, 85.
[^025_55]: Ibid.
[^025_56]: That this was the effect of the arrangement was the statement made after Gould's death by his persistent newspaper critic, the New York Times, Dec. 4, 1892. The agreement, according to this source, made Woerishoffer a bull on the market. The Phila. Press, May 11, 1886, asserts, on the contrary, that Woerishoffer lost in the Gould-created June rise.
[^025_57]: New York Times, June 8, 1884.
[^025_58]: New York Herald, June 11, 1884.
[^025_59]: New York Mail & Express, July 14, 1884.
[^025_60]: Bradstreet, Aug. 2, 1884, 72.
[^025_61]: Phila. North American, Aug. 23, 1884.
[^025_62]: This remark is noted in Phila. Press, Sept. 1, 1887.