# Chapter XXV - Gould Trades: September 1884-1886

Gould in the fall of 1884 was again successful as a man of business. Although his prestige as a trader had been impaired by the events of May and June, it was restored by the turn of events in July and August. His position as a man of wealth was dependent upon the maintenance of the market value of his holdings in Missouri Pacific, Western Union, Manhattan, and Union Pacific. While his holdings cannot be determined even with approximate accuracy, it is nevertheless clear that he had not finished his program of liquidation. He had arranged his affairs, paid off some loans, rearranged others, and above all he had escaped insolvency. He was still, however, interested in a rising market—in fact a rising market was essential to enable him to pay his debts and retire from the speculative markets.

His liquidation program was frustrated by the recurrence of the market decline which he had succeeded in stemming in the summer of 1884. Business deterioration and severity of railroad competition, which had occasioned so much of the trouble in 1883, was intensified in the fall of 1884. The rate wars continued. They were not to be solved by Gould nor by agreements among independently owned corporations led by aggressive personalities. They were destined to be solved by the emergence of a commanding figure in the railroad industry, by a personality who had the loyalty and confidence of a large army of investors. This Gould never had. His following consisted largely of traders ever ready to engage in some transaction promising large speculative profits.

The man who more than any other was beginning to command the loyalty of investors and who was destined soon to emerge from his position as a junior member of a banking house into a position of national eminence was Morgan.

By the fall of 1884, however, his time had not yet arrived. The forces which were to produce a new wave of rate wars, and to bring on a renewed break in railroad security prices were deep and far-reaching. Vanderbilt and the Pennsylvania were at sword's ends over the West Shore and the South Pennsylvania projects. Both the Grand Trunk and the Lackawanna refused to pool, and in January, 1885, the eastern pool broke down.

Though Gould looked with some concern upon this development, he did nothing. The market was dull and narrow, and although he still had large blocks of Wabash, Union Pacific, and Lackawanna for sale, it was impossible to unload any further. The Wabash stock was unsalable; the market for Union Pacific stock was not of the best; the buying from New England was almost entirely gone. Much of the stock was in the hands of speculators and traders, who took advantage of slight price advances to dispose of their holdings.

The market for the Lackawanna, however, was strong. Gould apparently believed that it was possible to lead the market out of its dullness with the Lackawanna as a market leader. In the third week in January, with the price in the lower 80s, Gould transferred 10,000 shares of stock to his name.[^1] Almost immediately after the announcement of this news the market moved forward with Lackawanna in the lead. There was, however, no sign of investment buying. The war among the anthracite roads, the rate wars among eastern trunk-line properties, the persistent gunfire exchanged between the Pennsylvania and the Vanderbilt interests, furnished the background for a drab business picture. The effort made by Gould and other market operators to interpret the rise in terms of a forthcoming boom in trade brought in some buying, but the sophisticated traders were emboldened by the rise to enter into a considerable number of short-selling contracts. A distinguished journal declared flatly that those people who believe that the rise in security prices was discounting trade prospects would soon be "undeceived."[^2]

It is probable that Gould took advantage of the rise engendered by the upward movement of the Lackawanna to sell some of his holdings in Western Union and Union Pacific.[^3] He found, however, that he had too much company on the selling side, and in order to discourage such selling, he adopted another unique tactical trading trick which caught the attention of an admiring financial community. Since the break of Western Union to below 50 in May of 1884, the price of the stock in the middle of February, 1885, despite all Gould's efforts, was still in the lower 60s. In the midst of his selling campaign he learned that John Jacob Astor was also selling. To an ordinary trader, to a man of the type of Jay Cooke, in the early seventies, or of Villard in the early eighties, a supporting program would probably represent the counterattack. When Cooke's friends sold Northern Pacific bonds in 1872 and 1873, Cooke bought to support the market, and when Villard's friends sold Northern Pacific and Oregon Transcontinental in the summer of 1883, Villard also bought.

When, however, Astor sold Western Union, Gould sent his faithful Connor into the board room to sell, and not to buy. Connor sold 12,000 shares. It was another Gould stage play, representing, in the language of one of the financial writers of the day, "simply one of those surprises for which Mr. Gould is famous...."[^4] In the next three days the price of Western Union broke from 63 to 58. Though this price decline might have interfered with Gould's program of further liquidation, outside liquidation on the declining market was assuredly discouraged.

In the face of the weakness of Western Union and Missouri Pacific, Lackawanna rose by the middle of February to 100. It was not clear whether White was leading another move against the short interest or whether Gould was directing the movement. In any event, at the higher prices, Gould sold.

By the second week of March the opportunity had gone. The reduction in the New York Central dividend to a 4 per cent annual basis and the continued cutting of rates discouraged even the most optimistic trader. The New York Central's dividend reduction was a hard blow to investor confidence. Many investors had come to look upon the stock as exempt from ordinary risks; they considered it as a sort of bond on which 8 per cent interest was owed.[^5] By the end of the month a heavy price break was the prelude to a decline which lasted for the entire month of April. Gould, recognizing that liquidation was impossible, left the financial district for a trip to the South. In May the decline, led by the strong investment stocks, continued. Gould meanwhile had returned and issued his customary batch of hopeful statements.

The trading community recognized that he was their leader, and that since the break in the markets of May, 1884, he had been a major factor in every important change. "Whatever may have been the diversified opinions of speculators at large before," declared the financial column of a New York newspaper, "recent occurrences have solidified them into one generally accepted belief, that Jay Gould is and has been the main and principal support, the chief thinker and mover in nearly all the speculative deals for more than a year, and that others who at times have seemed to be chiefs were only lieutenants possessed of ability to obey orders with [sic] discretionary power."[^6] Gould nevertheless misinterpreted the business and railroad situation. The dissolution of the pool had produced a spirit of helplessness. Adams, then president of the Union Pacific, has left a touching account of the utter degradation of spirit among the officers present at one of the last pool meetings. They were assembled, he said, in the office of Fink, the pool commissioner. "It struck me as a somewhat funereal gathering. Those composing it were manifestly at their wits' ends. They evidently felt, one and all, that something had got to be done; yet no one knew what to do. Everything had been tried and everything had failed. Mr. Fink's great costly organization was all in ruins, and no one felt any faith in new experiments. Yet if events were allowed to take their course unchecked the result was inevitable. They all reminded me of men in a boat in the swift water above the rapids of Niagara. They were looking one at another in blank dismay, and asking 'What next?' and no one could tell what next."[^7]

It was clear to all, including even those who see only upon the basis of established facts, that prolonged war was inevitable. The trunk-line situation was reduced to utter prostration. Eastbound rates from Chicago to New York dropped to a level which inflicted a loss to the carrying railroad of from $1.50 to $1.80 per ton.[^8] Even the highly profitable ore traffic was carried at losing rates,[^9] while grain rates from Chicago dropped to a fraction above two mills per ton mile.[^10]

The suicidal rate war was pressed by all the eastern trunk lines. With elimination of pools, co-operation among the roads was not possible. It was a free-for-all fight, and the situation soon grew desperate. "It seemed to my mind," said one railroad president, "as though something was absolutely necessary to be done to save the railroads of this country from utter ruin and destruction...."[^11] The leading journal of the iron and steel industry declared that the war had "more of the characteristics of the Commune than of a conservative management which commands the confidence of investors."[^12] The rate war was described by another observer, a few years after the event, as "one of the most unrelenting and bitter railroad wars ever seen in this or in any other country."[^13]

It seemed as though the railroads, strong and weak alike, were drifting in mid-ocean, without a savior in sight. Formal organizations, traffic divisions, and informal agreements had failed. No personality in whom people had sufficient confidence, to whom railroad managements and investors alike could entrust their problems, had come forth to solve the situation.

Here entered the paradox of paradoxes. Gould was convinced that he was the leader in whom investors and railroad managements would repose their confidence and to whom they would entrust their properties in the belief that thereby they would receive fair treatment. As one who commanded the policies of particular railroads, he was quick to take advantage of any opportunity afforded him to enrich the revenues of those roads. He apparently believed, nevertheless, that as a measure of desperation, in the absence of anything better, railroad managements and investors would respond to his leadership.

In mid-May, accordingly, personally and by letter, he asked the trunk lines if they would co-operate in the restoration of rates. He sent a wire to president Roberts of the Pennsylvania, stating that Sloan of the Lackawanna, and John A. Stewart, trustee of the West Shore, were willing to join in such an effort. Roberts replied that he would be glad to co-operate. Gould also wired King, president of the Erie, and King declared that he, too, would co-operate. He sent a wire to Rutter, president of the New York Central, who referred it to a vice president. The latter in a long and involved letter declared that the Pennsylvania and the Erie were not really co-operating. They had, he said, expressed only "a willingness to co-operate." It was the sort of letter which might be expected from an attorney or some judicially minded person, and not from an active businessman schooled in making decisions. The letter must have been carefully drafted in an effort to throw the onus for the continued conflict upon competitive properties.

Justification of the New York Central's point of view was revealed by the end of the week. Despite the co-operative offer made by the Pennsylvania, that road within a few days ordered a sharp reduction in passenger rates.[^14] Roberts had sized the situation up better than had Gould, recognizing, as Gould evidently did not, that Vanderbilt had left his childish things behind him. He had now grown to full intellectual maturity. He was clad in fighting armor, and it must have been a shock to Gould to learn that Vanderbilt would no longer conciliate.

Gould as a leader in eastern trunk-line circles was therefore a failure. His settlement effort was recognized for what it was—a scheme to elevate the stock market. "Never did such a stock-jobbing scheme fall flatter," declared one financial writer, who as a rule was more sympathetic to Gould than were many others.[^15] Losses no longer appalled Vanderbilt; he was becoming inured to them. His income and the value of his estate had dropped sharply. The New York Central had reduced its dividend by 50 per cent, and for months the road had earned little more than interest.[^16] The war of local rates between the West Shore and the New York Central continued in all its bitterness. The former did not earn operating expenses. Out of his rich experience Gould found justification for the following sweeping conclusion: "No such railroad war was ever before seen; it has been the bitterest in all my experience."[^17]

Gould's initiative, far from settling the rate war, probably increased its severity. The slashing rate cut by the Pennsylvania was followed by a hurried conference at the offices of the Trunk Line Commissioners. No road showed any evidence of compromise. The Pennsylvania was particularly aggressive. A prominent official of that road spoke sarcastically of both Gould and Vanderbilt. Surely, said this officer, Gould favored restoration of rates; today he wants to aid in the settlement of the rate war, and thirty days from now he is just as likely as not to be on the other side of the fence. Vanderbilt will not consent today, continued the official, but within thirty days he "may move heaven and earth" to do this.[^18]

All hands now appeared to be united in a confession of insolvency. Another meeting of presidents, convened at the suggestion of the Grand Trunk, accomplished nothing. The representatives of the West Shore and the Lackawanna were not even present. The meeting emphasized to the mind of one writer "the apparent hopelessness of a solution of a Trunk Line difficulty in the near future."[^19] Representatives of the railroad pool meanwhile appeared before a Congressional committee, and suggested that Congress protect the railroads from wrecking each other.[^20]

From this impasse, the solution came from an unexpected quarter. As in political history, so in industrial and financial history, the unexpected frequently happens. The emergence of great political characters as viewed in the perspective of historical development can be satisfactorily explained. To statesmen who carry the responsibility for the making of policies, such crystal-clear visions are not often possible. In fact there is little evidence of the clear-cut, hindsight vision of the historian being adopted as a matter of positive policy by the statesmen struggling in the morass of daily routine work for a light to the future. And so it is in many a field of financial and industrial history. The appearance of Rockefeller in the early seventies to stabilize an almost hopeless price war in the oil industry, the emergence of Carnegie as a cost-reducing factor in the steel rail industry, the leadership of Harriman in the late nineties as a rebuilder of the Union Pacific which government expert representatives insisted had little value, and whose securities were being sold by well-informed investors—all these events were unexpected.

And so in the summer of 1885 there emerged a striking business personality who infused new life into a business corpse. This personality was that of Morgan. Morgan, although not yet nationally known to the general public, had already created a large following of investors. He had sold large blocks of railroad and United States Government bonds both in this country and abroad. The market appreciation on government bonds had won him many business friends. Morgan was not a market trader, nor did he dominate the policies of business enterprises to benefit himself personally. He was on the boards of the New York Central, the Western Union, and numerous other properties, as a banker and as the representative of investors. Investors knew that; they believed that they could rely upon him, and he was confident that they would follow him.

When he returned from Europe in May, 1885, he began negotiations almost immediately for the settlement of disputes between the Pennsylvania and the Vanderbilt groups over the West Shore and the South Pennsylvania. In these discussions Gould was ignored. With the knowledge of pending negotiations, informed buying produced a substantial rise in the stock market. Gould, with no such knowledge, took advantage of the opportunity to sell.

Here was a market tailor-made for Gould, one for which he had long waited. Here was his opportunity, almost heaven-sent, to enable him after a prolonged period of four years to complete his liquidation. He sold more of his Lackawanna, and also of his Union Pacific of which early in May, 1885, he still had 50,000 shares.[^21] Toward the end of the second phase of the boom late in July, Adams, the Union Pacific president, stated publicly that Gould was selling many of his stocks, including Union Pacific.[^22]

Gould's policy of selling his speculative holdings on this Morgan-sponsored rise was accompanied by an almost unconcealed show of resentment against the railroad settlement in which he had been ignored. He was a man of influence and a leading factor in the southwestern picture, but whether or not he knew it, he had lost his power in eastern territory. To think that Morgan had thus succeeded where he had failed must have been galling, and his sense of personal frustration warped his business judgment. His actions indicate that he went beyond his liquidating program. While the general list was buoyant in late July, the Gould stocks were heavy, and rumors spread that Gould was short of leading stocks.[^23] By late July he had become pessimistic. Some weeks before, he had predicted the return of prosperity and a rise in market values, but now, he insisted, the market was on the verge of calamity. After Union Pacific declined to less than 50, Connor, his leading broker, sent out tips to sell.[^24] Gould openly expressed his contempt for the Morgan efforts. His market influence by this time waned almost to the vanishing point, and those who had followed his judgment profited little. The general list advanced, particularly the Vanderbilt stocks, but the Gould stocks declined. Union Pacific broke sharply. It was known late in July, when Gould assumed the lead in an effort to puncture the boom, that he had sold his Union Pacific, and this was the stock which he had stated only two months before he had inventoried at a price of 90 and which would soon reach that point.[^25]

Security buyers, however, were watching closely the activities of Morgan, and they grew ever more confident that he would follow up the West Shore agreement with an all-inclusive rate settlement. Despite the fact that little was accomplished in adjusting the rates to a satisfactory level, the market continued its advance in July and August. The buyers may not have liked the continuing rate wars, but they were confident that Morgan would soon be as successful in ending the general war as he had been in settling the Pennsylvania-Vanderbilt differences.

Morgan unlike Gould did not make a settlement overnight—a settlement which although superficially successful was fundamentally delusive, proposed mainly as a means of affecting the stock market. Morgan, in preparing the ground carefully, communicated with railroad presidents and their traffic executives. By September he had secured no results and despite the West Shore settlement, rates continued to decline. In mid-August the demoralization at Chicago and other western points was as severe as at any time since the beginning of the war, and three weeks later Chicago-New York grain rates reached another record low.[^26]

The renewed rate war dampened speculative and investment hopes, and selling in the security market again appeared. The Vanderbilt stocks were particularly weak and Gould by late August and early September was still unable to complete the liquidation of his speculative holdings. The market did not long remain depressed. Morgan continued his efforts to reach an agreement, and by the last week in September results began to appear. For the first time in the history of the war there were indications of an early peace. The trunk-line presidents met on September 22. Although they did not organize a pool, they did unanimously agree to raise westbound rates.[^27] Since the increase was not scheduled to go into effect until October 1, railroad earnings would not be immediately affected.

The security markets nevertheless revived. Reports persisted that Morgan would cement corporate relationships in eastern territory by throwing the Reading under control of the Pennsylvania. At this time, however, he was not successful in eliminating the Reading sore spot. The stockholders and junior bondholders of the road still entertained great hopes of the future earning power of their property. Before consenting to follow Morgan's leadership, security holders were destined to travel through a valley of bitter experience and disastrous financial losses. It was not until the middle nineties that Morgan finally achieved that mastery which made him the leader of American security interests.

The possibility of a general settlement was nevertheless widely entertained throughout the fall. Early in October the security market entered into another boom which soon surpassed in scope and virility the summer rise. Gould now had the opportunity of unloading the rest of his Union Pacific. For some weeks he had been publicly reported as pessimistic on the future market position of that stock. Its price, however, rose 50 per cent between August and November, and Gould finally liquidated his commitments. He no longer found it necessary to conceal his true market position. He insisted that prices were too high, and that only the cheapness of money allowed manipulators to advance prices.[^28] The surprising strength of the market trapped a number of venturesome short traders, and two of the determined market antagonists of Gould finally failed. One was the redoubtable Smith, his old Erie associate; and the other, Soutter, who had aided Kneeland in the fight in behalf of the Metropolitan against Gould. Both traders made large profits in the violent market break in the spring of 1884; both overstayed their markets.

Professional traders, armchair prognosticators and interpreters failed to appreciate the real market position. Instead of a corrective reaction the market entered into a new burst of strength, for Morgan had succeeded by early November in promoting a settlement of the eastern railroad war that to many observers had all the earmarks of finality. The agreements which had been made at intervals in the preceding three decades were usually preceded by concessions. A pool was usually arranged and the traffic divided. The efficacy of such traffic divisions had been almost destroyed by the spring of 1885, and Gould was among the railroad men early to appreciate the fact.

Morgan made a sincere effort to produce a communion of interest by attacking the general causes of unsettlement, and avoiding the mistakes which had been made in earlier efforts. Morgan reached the conclusion that it was possible to make an all-around settlement, even though each cause of irritation was not removed. He was mistaken, however, in placing undue reliance upon administrative machinery. The agreement which was made by trunk-line presidents on November 5, 1885, contained some distinct improvements over the earlier pacts. This was not an ordinary understanding for the division of business. Each line pledged itself to act with its associates on all rate-making actions, and to take no independent action on any question which affected the welfare of the others. The agreement made another revolutionary advance. The eastern trunk lines for the first time assumed responsibility for maintaining through rates with their western connections and definitely pledged themselves to refuse to divide rates or extend traffic facilities to any connection which refused to maintain rates.

The elaborate machinery to enforce the agreement made a profound impression on some observers. The contract was declared "not only ironclad, but copper-bottomed and steel-riveted in its traffic details."[^29] The first result of the settlement was satisfactory. Rates were restored to the figure prevailing before the beginning of the general smash more than a year before.

The effect of this new contract upon the market was spectacular. Except for a short interval in late August and September the market had been rising almost steadily since June. On many stocks the price had recovered a large part of the losses suffered in the panic smash of May, 1884; on a number of others there had been no reaction worthy of notice throughout late September and the entire month of October. The announcement of the new trunk-line contract produced another violent rise. The public was in on a large scale and speculation ran wild. Gould was able finally to complete his liquidation. Despite all rumors to the contrary, he was selling out. It was difficult for financial analysts to adjust themselves to this new arrangement in the last stage of the advance in December, 1885. When Vanderbilt died suddenly the correspondent of an authoritative London weekly, after describing Gould as "the biggest toad in the puddle,"[^30] insisted further that he was selling the market short.

Gould's announcement early in December, when the market was still moving dizzily upward, that he had decided to retire was consequently taken lightly. One trade observer flatly remarked that the statement was of little importance.[^31] He had announced his retirement from speculative activities a number of times before, and this announcement, it was believed, was probably part of some as yet undisclosed venture. Gould's trading career was finished. If he had intended seriously to take the leadership in breaking the rising market which set in in the summer of 1885, be must have been disappointed; although it is probable that he had no such intention. He was happy that he had successfully unloaded his speculative holdings, after a long, patient, grinding campaign lasting over four years. His retirement was genuine. Early in the spring of 1886 when questions were raised about his retirement, he testified before a Congressional committee that he had neither bought nor sold stocks since the beginning of the year.[^32] Some two months later, approached by a reporter, Gould insisted that he had neither bought nor sold a share of Western Union nor of any other stock, for that matter, since the first of January. "I am out of the Street, and nothing whatever could induce me to go back into it."[^33]

In the second half of 1886 another market rise developed, and again Gould denied any participation in security trading. The boom was ushered in by another Morgan move. Settlement of the Pennsylvania-Vanderbilt war in the summer of 1885 had not realized all the anticipated results. The major deterrent was the financial condition of the Reading. Though its traffic density was heavy, its financial structure was overburdened with bonds. In the middle eighties it was in receivership for the second time. Meanwhile Gowen had lined up with Garrett of the Baltimore & Ohio. Gowen wanted a line to Pittsburgh, and Garrett a line to New York. Both projects were aimed at the Pennsylvania, and the latter retaliated on both fronts. By building the Schuylkill Valley lines, it competed with the Reading for a share of its anthracite traffic. It fought the Baltimore & Ohio by refusing to allow that road to use its New York line. Rate and passenger fare cuts followed.

In 1886 Morgan renewed his efforts to reorganize the Reading, and by mid-September, 1886, "without parade, almost without suspicion,"[^34] the troubles of this eastern property under his careful handling were solved. Gowen retired from the property. A voting trust was set up whose policy, in the words of a director, would be the prevention of "disastrous warfare" between the Reading and the Pennsylvania, or other roads.[^35] The security markets responded immediately, and prices rose rapidly. Trading in Reading was enormous. On one day soon after the settlement 25 per cent of the volume of the stock exchange was in securities of that company. The market rise proved to be one of the most extraordinary in history. The railroad settlement had been accomplished in a background of favoring conditions. Money was easy, and a supply of money under the then existing banking system was a market factor of great importance. Eastern railroad earnings had been improving, and there was also general expectations that a pool of the granger roads would improve their earnings.

The lead given by the Morgan-Reading settlement soon resulted in a "fever of speculation."[^36] By the end of November the weekly volume of trading was more than double that of two weeks before. Speculation in some respects exceeded anything ever before witnessed in Wall Street.

Again, as in the market of the year before, the Gould stocks did not participate in the rise. In the face of the upward movement Gould stuck to his decision. Six months later he insisted again that he had been out of the market since January, 1886. "I shall never under any circumstances," he emphasized, "be a speculator again."[^37]

In mid-December the market collapsed. Gould had stated only a few days before that the market "was the wildest speculation he had ever seen."[^38] Money rates rose from 6 to 75 per cent; and two days after that to 100 per cent. This was followed within the next three days by a drop of 2 per cent. It was one of the most skillfully executed stock-market breaks on record. The manipulation of money rates was evidence that some person or group with large resources was behind the break. This, together with the remarks made by current observers, friendly and unfriendly, led to the conclusion that the spectacular market revulsion was engineered by Gould, or with his direct connivance and support.

To the bitter New York press critic there was no doubt that Gould was selling. Gould himself said, "I am glad that I am no longer in Wall Street."[^39]

As speculator and trader, Gould in all probability ended his career in 1885. Speculation had brought him to the edge of disaster. Masterful trading negotiations with his trading foes in June, 1884, not shrewd trading, saved him from collapse. A new personality, Morgan, grappling with old forces, had created selling markets which enabled Gould to liquidate. He took opportunity of these advantages and regained some of his losses. His net trading loss was, however, heavy. As a stock-market trader he must be classed as a failure.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXV

[^1]: Phila. Press, Jan. 23, 1885.
[^2]: London Economist, Feb. 28, 1885, 255.
[^3]: Phila. Press, Feb. 14, 1885, estimated that in the previous week Gould had sold at least 50,000 shares of Western Union and Union Pacific.
[^4]: Ibid., Feb. 15, 1885.
[^5]: R. R. Gaz., Sept. 12, 1884, 670.
[^6]: New York Tribune, May 18, 1885.
[^7]: Report of the Select Committee in Interstate Commerce, Senate, 49th Congress, 1st Session, 1886, 1207-8, Adams.
[^8]: Phila. Press, May 21, 1885.
[^9]: Iron Age, June 11, 1885, 16.
[^10]: Bradstreet, May 9, 1885, 316.
[^11]: M. E. Ingalls, president, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, St. Louis & Chicago, cited in Ry. Review, April 11, 1885, 170.
[^12]: Iron Age, May 7, 1885, 24.
[^13]: Stockholder, September 6, 1887.
[^14]: New York Tribune, May 26, 1885; Phila. Press, May 25, 1885.
[^15]: Phila. Press, May 25, 1885.
[^16]: Early in January, 1885, the New York Central informed the Railroad Commissioners that it was earning only its interest. Bradstreet, Jan. 17, 1885, 39. Since then conditions had become worse.
[^17]: New York Tribune, May 24, 1885.
[^18]: Phila. Press, June 1, 1885.
[^19]: Bradstreet, June 13, 1885, 396.
[^20]: Ibid., May 30, 1885, 364.
[^21]: Chron., May 9, 1885, 570.
[^22]: Phila. Press, July 29, 1885.
[^23]: Bradstreet, July 25, 1885, 57.
[^24]: Phila. Press, July 25, 1885.
[^25]: Ibid., May 16, 1885.
[^26]: Iron Age, Sept. 17, 1885, 23; Bradstreet, Sept. 12, 1885, 169.
[^27]: Ibid., Sept. 26, 1885, 201.
[^28]: Ibid., Oct. 3, 1885, 217; Oct. 10, 1885, 233.
[^29]: Phila. Press, Nov. 6, 1885.
[^30]: London Economist, Dec. 26, 1885.
[^31]: Iron Age, Dec. 3, 1885, 25.
[^32]: Labor Troubles in the South and West, Report No. 4174, House of Representatives, 49th Congress, 2nd Session, 1886, Part 2, 64, Gould.
[^33]: New York Tribune, July 5, 1886.
[^34]: New York Times, Sept. 19, 1886.
[^35]: R. R. Gaz., Sept. 24, 1886, 664.
[^36]: London Economist, Dec. 25, 1886, 1605.
[^37]: Phila. Press, June 25, 1887. Many years later a writer in the Wall Street Journal, Nov. 15, 1924, declared positively that Gould participated in this market. This writer believed that history had not recorded "a Wall Street operator of larger courage or one that could be a better appraiser of stock markets, their quality and their capacity, than was J. Gould." On the market of 1886, he continued, Gould sold most of his stocks in the rising market, sold short, and lost heavily. But he changed his mind, bought at higher prices, and made "the biggest winning that ever came to him in any market." It is impossible to assess the value of statements of journalists made years after the event. It is possible, despite all visible evidence to the contrary, that the statement may be true; that Gould had spoken an untruth to a Congressional committee in May and to a newspaper reporter in July; that in fact, he was heavily engaged in the market, first on the down side, then on the up. It is not probable, however, that he could have kept these operations secret; that he could have denied them openly. All these things are of course probable. The statement of this journalist may perhaps be set down as a lapse of memory. The evidence supporting this conclusion is not satisfactory.
[^38]: Bradstreet, Dec. 18, 1886, 393.
[^39]: New York Tribune, Dec. 16, 1886.