# Chapter XXVIII - Gould Stabilizes Rates

The program of railroad construction outlined in the two previous chapters permanently changed the western railroad equilibrium. The roads east of the Missouri crossed the river, and the roads west of the river crossed to the territory on the east. Gould's southwestern system no longer was the only line which connected Chicago and the Middle West with Texas. The Atchison was a new competitor, and the Rock Island having thrown its lines west across the state of Kansas into Denver, and south to the Kansas-Oklahoma boundary, was another disturbing factor. In the Northwest, the Burlington had invaded southern Minnesota by acquiring a working interest in the affiliated Chicago, Burlington & Northern. The construction of the Canadian Pacific and the provision of through routes over the road and its connections, and the development of railroad-owned steamship lines on the Great Lakes from Duluth were other factors which upset the delicate balance of territorial equality established prior to the events of the middle eighties.

The construction and expansion programs stimulated in large part by the policies of Gould introduced new forces which in a short time broke down almost the entire rate structure, both through and local. Demoralizing disturbances sufficient in extent to reduce earnings and impair financial structures had formerly been confined to eastern territory. These disturbances had been brought under control by various devices. The textbook of recorded experience served no useful purpose however in teaching western railroad men the perils of rate cuts. They themselves had to undergo the experience personally before they could be made to adopt most of the measures the eastern railroad men had adopted. When rate wars had produced their baneful effects upon railroad earnings and finances in the West, it was Gould who for the first time in his career assumed leadership in an effort to stabilize rates and maintain values. It was a unique position for a man who in the popular eye had for so many years been considered a railroad wrecker. He was now to come forth in a new role—that of railroad stabilizer.

The rate wars in western territory began even before the competitive railroad construction of 1886-87 was well under way. Early in 1885, months after Adams had assumed the presidency of the Union Pacific, a rate dispute between the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific led to the cancellation of the Pacific Mail subsidy, and to a diversion of the Union Pacific's westbound traffic from the Central Pacific to the Oregon Short Line. Huntington on behalf of the Central Pacific retaliated by exacting local rates on traffic interchanged with the Union Pacific.[^1] Traffic pools organized some weeks later failed to produce any settlement, and by November the continued unfriendliness among the transcontinental lines led Huntington to seek a way out. In a letter to Adams, referring to the "unpleasantness" among the managers of these roads, he suggested a meeting in New York "to see if something [could not] be done that [would] work more to the satisfaction of all than the arrangements heretofore made."[^2] Perkins was dissatisfied with Huntington, and although he could not see how he could compromise, he would "meet Huntington and talk."[^3] Adams was sure that if railroad presidents would only come together peace would reign eternally. "They got to fighting," he wrote, "simply because they [would] not meet." If the houses of the railroad presidents could be built in one block, "a sort of Presidents' Road," they could walk down to their offices in the morning "and I would be willing I think to wager my head that there would not be one quarrel then where there are five quarrels now." However Adams appreciated that his views probably would not be accepted. "I simply am a go-between," he declared, "carrying out my high mission among the railroads of the country. Here again I am acting simply as the friend of peace. Probably, before we get through, both parties will unite in pitching into me. Nevertheless, so it was of old!"[^4]

These conferences among western railroad men, however, proved fruitless. Early in 1886, transcontinental rates collapsed, and the transcontinental pool gave way. This war was settled by the end of the year. The year 1886 had been prosperous; the collapse in business which followed the panic in the spring of 1884 having been short-lived.

Competitive construction completed largely in 1887 laid the basis for the rate cuts which reached their full force in 1888. By January, rates between Chicago and St. Paul and Minneapolis, for example, were demoralized. A responsible railroad official referred to "the worse than absurd waste of revenue [then] going on,"[^5] a waste which threatened the solvency of both the Burlington and the Northwestern.[^6] In the Missouri Valley the rate war also raged. In Kansas the new railroad commission had begun its rate-reduction program. The rates voluntarily initiated by the active contestants, however, were "considerably lower" than those ordered by the commission.[^7]

The competitive situation was intensified by the fact that not all of the roads had extended their lines beyond the Missouri. Two important properties, the Alton and the Chicago, St. Paul & Kansas City,[^8] served the area between Chicago and Kansas City. They originated no traffic from points beyond the river and could secure such business only by quoting lower rates. Late in 1887 the Alton reduced grain rates from Kansas City, and the Burlington followed with corresponding cuts from Omaha. This forced the roads serving other Missouri River points to do likewise. A few weeks later the Alton, in co-operation with its eastern connections, reduced rates to Toledo and Detroit. This action forced the Wabash, in order to hold its share of the traffic, to meet the cut. In the first quarter of 1888 the rate cuts were so drastic in Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, and Missouri that it became difficult for many of the lines even to earn their operating expenses.[^9]

The reduced earnings engendered by these rate cuts were anticipated by the security markets in the summer of 1887. Though the Gould stocks were hard hit, Gould himself was cheerful. In the spring he insisted that the local business of the Missouri Pacific was exceptionally good,[^10] and in the fall he reiterated this judgment. The Missouri Pacific, he said, thus far in 1887 had made $3,000,000 more than in 1886, and the system was $5,000,000 ahead.[^11] His public expressions of confidence in the future of the road were shown by a statistical exhibit to the company's shareholders in a statement which accompanied the September dividend check. The statement called attention to the increase in mileage and decrease per mile of the company's debts. In 1881 on a per-mile basis the outstanding stock was about $27,000 and the bonded debt about $39,000, while by the end of 1887 the corresponding figures were $10,700, and slightly over $20,000.[^12]

This was a remarkable showing and was calculated to make an impression on the informed but unreflective investor. Though the facts were correct, they did not point to the truth. Each mile is not standardized in its traffic density and traffic diversity. One mile moves more traffic and more higher-rated traffic than another. One mile, in short, has a larger profit than another. Some of the branch lines built, as Gould himself stated a few years later, hardly earned their interest charges.[^13]

This type of reasoning made little impression on the experienced investor. The reasoning probably did not ring true to Gould himself, and perhaps it may not be too improbable to believe that Gould, knowing the truth, prepared a statement of this kind in order to facilitate the sale of part of his holdings. The security markets were not even temporarily buoyed by the statements, and the price of Missouri Pacific continued to weaken.

The rate wars meanwhile continued in all parts of the West. Indeed they became more violent than ever. Early in 1888, the rates in the Northwest were described as "seriously demoralized."[^14]

The competitive methods which produced these results called forth forebodings among railroad leaders. Adams observed that he had discovered "a depth of railroad morals among freight agents lower than had ever previously existed, and that is saying much." He referred to the "sneak-thief and pick-pocket methods of management."[^15]

It came to be generally realized that the rate wars with their adverse effects on railroad revenue and on values of railway securities were principally the work of traffic executives and subordinates. The evil genius was the traffic salesman who was not responsible to the stockholding body. Charged with the responsibility of getting business at any price, he took his orders seriously and cut rates, granted rebates, and introduced discriminations.

The losses that followed the completion of the building program were not the result of financial abuses. There was no stock watering, and no construction companies. Stocks and bonds were sold for cash at reasonable prices. Losses to security holders nevertheless were substantial. The drop in values which had begun in the spring of 1887, and which was quickened in the latter months of the year, swelled into a crescendo in the early months of 1888. In January the price of Missouri Pacific suddenly declined; the reason, remarked a writer in a New York daily, was "mysterious." It was difficult to determine the earnings of the system. They were published annually, but the system was so complex and the relations of the constituent roads were so mixed up, that only an expert could figure out what the system was doing even if he had all the necessary data.[^16]

In the midst of these uncertainties, Gould after a five months' absence, returned to the country. His return was signaled by a renewed break in the price of Missouri Pacific. The explanation was given by events. For the first time since the road came under Gould control, it reduced its dividend. Gould nevertheless insisted that Missouri Pacific was worth $150.[^17] He followed this with a statement a few weeks later, reiterating his expressions of hope and confidence. The Missouri Pacific, he said, was bonded and capitalized at a per-mile figure lower than that of any leading road.[^18] If only the short sellers understood the real situation, he observed two days later, there would be panic. There were few stocks afloat in Wall Street, he insisted. They were held more than ever by investors.

The Missouri Pacific's earnings and dividends were symptomatic of the western railroad picture. The Missouri Pacific was the first in the field of dividend reductions, just as it had been first in railroad expansion. Within a few weeks the Atchison reduced its quarterly dividend. The cycle of dividend reductions thus begun in the spring continued throughout the fall. In September the St. Paul passed, and within a few weeks the Atchison made another cut. At the next meeting in January, 1889, it completed the cycle of devastation and passed its dividend. This was followed by a reduction of the conservative Illinois Central dividend.

In the face of these casualties, Gould emphasized that, "intrinsically," Missouri Pacific stock was cheap. If only the western roads, he said, could get the rates of six years ago, "they would hardly know what to do with the money earned...."[^19] The drastic dividend reductions were nevertheless financial facts of primary significance. Their importance could not be minimized by expressions of hope and confidence. Railroad leaders, recognizing the dangers involved in the rate wars, began to look for a solution. There seemed to be no satisfactory alternative to agreement. The leading roads, first in one section of the country, then in another, turned toward co-operation in the hope that it would succeed where competition had failed.

Division of traffic or revenue among roads to remove the incentive to rate-cutting had in 1887 been made illegal. It became necessary accordingly to work out some new arrangement designed to bring an end to rate disturbances.

By fall, in consequence of dividend reductions, the problem assumed national significance. Thoughtful observers began to realize that no single company or railroad could possibly settle these demoralizing wars. Some believed that only Congress could arrive at a solution. Others believed that unified action could be achieved only by the trusteeing of the majority holdings of the leading railroad stocks; while still others asserted that some outstanding personality, in whom railroad investors had confidence, must take the lead. The New York City financial weekly, whose views carried considerable weight in financial circles, stressed that "the situation [required] some authority over and above these differing managements, strong enough to force a permanent arrangement of present rivalries, and to compel future principles of living and lines of growth which shall not be destructive of one another. Some such power as this must come in before lasting order [could] be brought out of the Western chaos."[^20] The Moses to lead the railroads out of the financial wilderness, it continued, was Morgan.

The time for Morgan had not yet arrived. In the area south of the Union Pacific, in the Missouri Valley and in the Southwest to the Pacific Coast, the railroad industry was dominated by three systems and by three personalities. These were, respectively, the Southern Pacific, the Atchison, and the Missouri Pacific; and the men involved were Huntington, Strong, and Gould. Here the clash of personalities, particularly between Strong and Gould, was the most violent. Since each property was of equal importance, none could individually settle rate disputes. Gould could not employ any of his abilities in the fields of financial and corporate strategy in an effort to settle this problem. Inasmuch as the Southern Pacific stock was closely held by Huntington and his associates, Gould could not gain control. There was some possibility that he might be able to acquire control of the Atchison. The road's large shareholders in New England were not, however, willing to trust their property to Gould.

If competition was to be stabilized by common action, it was essential that some plan be devised to secure agreement among independent companies, separately owned and separately operated. And it was during this period (the summer and fall of 1888) that ideas were devised, plans drafted and arguments presented that set the pattern for discussion in years to come. Ideas for unified action among the large carriers still remained in the discussion stage. Some were incorporated in the tentative plan for railroad consolidation in 1921, and others in the so-called final plan of consolidation of the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1929.[^21] The leadership in drafting the plans of railroad harmony was assumed jointly by Gould and Huntington. Beginning with the summer of 1888, and lasting for about three years, these two, first working by themselves, and later jointly with the presidents of other roads, evolved one scheme after another in an effort to devise machinery to eliminate discriminatory rates and promote a stable rate schedule.

One of the earlier plans was a railroad clearing house. In its development, in the working out of details, and in the struggle for its adoption, Gould took the lead. For some weeks in November he met with Huntington, Adams, Strong, and others in closed session.[^22] The plan which was revealed late that month was almost breath-taking in its universality. Nothing like it had ever been presented. All existing freight and passenger associations were to be abolished and their functions taken by a clearinghouse. Each road west of the Mississippi River would be represented, and the clearinghouse would take over the rate-making authority of all the roads. It would also prescribe the divisions on all through business. The suggested agreement struck at the very root of the stabilization problem by declaring "that the bidding for business by means of private concessions shall cease...."[^23]

This sweeping grant of power to a new body and the surrender of all managerial control over rate-making was the most radical step in railroad unity of action ever suggested. In concentration of managerial authority, and in the centralized placing of responsibility, it was a close parallel to the industrial trusts. These were anathema to the popular mind, and so was the proposed railroad clearinghouse. The plan nevertheless was supported by some who could not possibly be classified as Gould supporters. Adams, president of the Union Pacific, declared it should have been in effect ten years before. The plan was not a trust, he insisted.[^24]

The opposition, however, was immediate and overwhelming. In less than a week after its publication, its doom was certain. Gould, quick to learn, saw the light and tried to evade responsibility for its failure. He had not invented the scheme, he said; he had only approved a trial test.[^25] The plan disappeared. In the discussions which took place in the fall and early winter of 1888, Gould succeeded in completing plans in southwestern territory for joint action with Huntington and Strong. In co-operation with representatives of the Rock Island and the Burlington, an agreement was reached to increase the rates 25 per cent. Huntington, in announcing the schedule, remarked that "something was really needed to end this difficulty [referring to the rate war], for the situation was becoming serious."[^26]

In his efforts to work out an agreement covering the other parts of western territory, Gould was not successful. He was now to learn that his financial ingenuity and ruthlessness in interpreting agreements in accordance with their strict letter instead of their spirit, had cost him the support of many railroad officers. Many refused to attend meetings or join in plans if they were arranged or proposed by Gould.[^27] Despite this there was agreement on the necessity for co-operation. While Gould was busily engaged in canvassing schemes with his southwestern associates, those railroad men who were not in sympathy with him succeeded in interesting Morgan. Since the West Shore settlement in the summer of 1885, he had led one railroad after another into various plans to stabilize eastern railroad conditions.

Late in 1888 Morgan, responding to the confidence placed in him, invited the presidents of western roads to his home. At the first meeting, a preliminary draft was drawn up. It was accompanied by another even more important arrangement: that rates should be restored on January 1 for sixty days. It was expected that in the meantime a plan for permanent stabilization would be presented. The meeting had been arranged, and the documents drawn, largely by the bankers. The bankers were anxious to solve the immediate problem: how to terminate the rate war. They accomplished their immediate objective. One banker, with confidence born of ignorance of the vital problems involved, declared exuberantly, even before a definite plan had been drawn up, "The work is already done so far as the prevention of rate wars is concerned. You will hear of no more rate wars.[^28]

In drafting the agreement designed to enlist the support of the western railway world, Morgan ignored Gould. A new organization was formed, the Interstate Commerce Railway Association, vested with jurisdiction over western competitive traffic. To the association was given the responsibility of maintaining "reasonable, uniform and stable rates." Power was given to punish any employee found guilty of rate-cutting, and the railroad presidents pledged themselves to discharge this responsibility.[^29] It was impossible, however, to obtain the assent of all the western roads. One of the most conservative, the Illinois Central, refused to sign. By a resolution of its board, the road decided only to give the new arrangement its "moral support as far as may be consistent with the best interests of the company."[^30] Not so strange was the reluctance of Gould to sign on behalf of the Missouri Pacific. Even in his desire to secure some measure of rate stability, he had his eye on competitive realities. He refused to sign on the ground that a road, the Kansas City Ft. Scott & Memphis, controlling a line running southeastward from Kansas City to Memphis, and thus competing with Gould's newly established Arkansas route, refused to sign. The officers of the other road insisted that they would not sign until they received a guarantee that the Missouri Pacific and its southeastern connection, the Richmond Terminal, would not manipulate rates. Gould instead of reaching some amicable agreement was ready with another of his ingenious suggestions. He proposed that if any line outside of the agreement (this included the Richmond Terminal) refused to sustain rates, the new association could authorize its members to meet the competition. This would prevent the sacrificing of local rates on the member lines. The plan was impractical and met with no support.[^31] It was not until February 22, 1889, that the agreement was finally signed.[^32]

Even before the association was formally approved and before it could commence to function, rate cuts broke out anew. The rate rise, sponsored by the Morgan meeting, was lost early in February. Rates, however, were soon restored and an armistice followed. Railroads and shippers watched each other to see who would cut rates first. No shipper could permit those doing business on a competing road to get a rate reduction; nor could a railroad agree to permit another road to reduce its rates. By early March traffic conditions improved and the Missouri Pacific appended its signature to the agreement. Within a week thereafter, rate cuts again broke out. It was initiated in the Northwest by the same road, not a member of the new association, which had taken the lead in the previous two years—the Chicago Burlington & Northern, now described by one writer as the "prince of destroyers of railway harmony."[^33] Other roads followed. The smaller lines, the Wisconsin Central and the Stickney line, insisted that they would make rates as low as any others. The old charges and countercharges followed.

The market for railroad securities again weakened, and Gould began to lose hope. The railroad business, he said, as the rate war was breaking out, was the worst he had seen it in thirty years.[^34] The Interstate Commerce Railway Association meanwhile had been formally organized and its administrative agency had issued a number of decisions. These were minor in character and did not test the ability of the new agency to function as a rate stabilizer. The first major case involved the Alton. The road refused to obey the directive, and its vice president issued an intemperate statement denouncing the association as "a colossal fancy of some eastern bankers whose sole excuse for foisting it upon the practical managers of the West was the supposed necessity of doing something to satisfy demands of Wall Street."[^35] In the emergency growing out of the withdrawal of the Alton, the association authorized member roads to follow their judgment in meeting the Alton's reductions. This was an open invitation to war. Rate cuts followed again in rapid succession.

Against this dreary background Gould recovered his confidence. Describing himself as "bullish" on the general situation, he insisted that he hadn't sold a share of Missouri Pacific stock for a year;[^36] yet within a few weeks the price of Missouri Pacific renewed its decline. It was soon learned that the road had been unable to complete its plan of financing through the issue of bonds and stocks. Loss of confidence in railroad earning power had left it with an unfinished program of construction and expansion. In order to meet its obligations it borrowed between $7,000,000 and $10,000,000 from Gould and Sage. To informed investors and traders this was a dangerous sign. It was the debt owed Gould and his associates, personally or indirectly, which precipitated although it did not cause the financial breakdown in the Wabash, the Texas & Pacific, and the Kansas & Texas.

In the midst of these rate and stock-market disturbances, a new development suddenly occurred which intensified the difficulties of the Missouri Pacific. The Northwestern had extended its line to Wyoming and had made plans to build its road to Ogden for connection with the Central Pacific; and probably even beyond to Los Angeles, which would make it a new transcontinental rival.[^37] Its completion to Ogden and beyond would be a heavy blow to the Union Pacific; it would produce another division of the business, and introduce still another rate-disturbing factor.

Railroads, having been seriously hurt, had however learned their lesson. Instead of building new lines they entered into traffic agreements, which, at least momentarily, would serve the interests of the participants equally well. Of these agreements, one destined to become a permanent influence in the railroad life of the country was concluded in October, 1889, between the Northwestern and the Union Pacific. Although the two roads agreed to interchange traffic on a preferential basis, it was not an exclusive contract. Because of the agreement the Northwestern pledged itself not to extend its lines as planned.

The contract was hailed by an authoritative western railway journal as "one of the most important compacts in recent years,"[^38] while Adams, president of the Union Pacific, wrote that the two roads had now become "in all essential through traffic respects one company. They will protect and sustain each other; and, in case of attack, make common cause."[^39] The Northwestern was a Vanderbilt road and so was the Lake Shore-New York Central system. It was expected that the Vanderbilts, who controlled a major system to New York and Boston, would now be able to control a through line from coast to coast. The Missouri Pacific was placed on the defensive. Gould reacted immediately, and concluded an agreement with the Denver, which virtually extended its line to Ogden, and from that point via the Huntington system to the Pacific Coast.

Gould also opened an attack on the Union Pacific-Northwestern contract on the ground that it was in violation of the Interstate Commerce Railway Association agreement. The latter, officially recognizing the validity of the protest, stated explicitly that the traffic contract had been made in defiance of the spirit and even of the letter of the compact. This was too much for Adams of the Union Pacific, and shortly thereafter both that road and the Northwestern resigned. This was the death blow to the association.

There was nothing further to hinder the development of competitive forces. Formidable economic conditions, however, gave assurance to the prospect that rate reductions would be avoided. The heavy wheat and corn crops produced record movements on some of the western roads. The general manager of the Missouri Pacific reported that he had never seen anything to compare with the traffic now moving. Traffic for the first two months of 1890 was described as "phenomenal."[^40] There was therefore no justification for a decline in rates. Business was heavy and the plant and equipment inadequate to carry the traffic. There was every reason to expect that the rise in traffic would be followed by a rise in earnings.

That, however, was not to be. The industry was in the throes of forces which led almost insistently to additional rate wars. There is nothing unusual about this phenomenon. In the following half century of American business history, many industries were afflicted in times of prosperity with the plague of indiscriminate price cuts. Even in the booming 1920's, such industries as radio, rubber, paperboard, electric refrigeration and others, faced with a rapid rise in business, cut prices. Although volume expanded, earnings declined.

The renewal of rate wars, despite appearance of prosperity, was ushered in by the St. Paul in February, 1890. Almost all other roads had already manipulated rates, insisted its officials. The St. Paul's reduction was met by its competitors, and within a few days radical rate cuts appeared in the Missouri Valley from Kansas City to the Twin Cities.[^41] The war immediately spread to points west of the Missouri. Those reductions were met by its competitors. It was however the cut in the St. Louis-Kansas City passenger rate—the Missouri Pacific's bread and butter[^42]—which led to the general rate-slashing.

There was no administrative machinery to set in motion in an effort to stop these disturbances. The presidents of the western roads therefore acted informally and called a meeting to settle the war by agreement. Gould however had returned again to his accustomed technique. He thought he saw in this disturbed situation a means of helping the Missouri Pacific at the expense of the other roads. Hence neither he nor any other representative of the Missouri Pacific attended the meeting. The meeting produced no results. Cable of the Rock Island insisted that Gould was responsible for the failure. Gould, he said, could "settle the whole Western railroad rate war in five minutes if he wants to."[^43] Perhaps in the heat of the moment, and in a spirit of resentment, Cable gave Gould more credit than he was entitled to, but there is no gainsaying the fact that Gould's influence was exerted against the side of stability.

Another meeting of the presidents meanwhile was held in Chicago early in May. Every western line was represented, either in person or by letter. Although the presidents remained in continuous session for a week, no agreement was reached and the rate war continued—in fact it grew worse. In any event, rate cuts were intensified. In passenger fares, chaos prevailed.[^44] It became evident to western railroad officers and financial observers that Gould was the chief disturbing factor. "It is conceded," wrote a hostile Gould critic, "that the question of a speedy restoration of rates depends, to a great extent, upon the course that Jay Gould will pursue."[^45] The Atchison officers took the lead in an effort to bring Gould to terms. At one time it was reported that the management of that road gave him twenty-four hours to decide upon peace or war. Gould at the time was ill; but through his son he made overtures to the chairman of the Atchison. Congratulating him on the acquisition of the Frisco, he expressed the hope that the southwestern roads might live in peace and harmony. Gould's son, George, stated publicly that his father wanted the Missouri Pacific to be brought into harmony with the Atchison, and that the road would restore rates as soon as the differences with other western roads were adjusted.[^46]

Gould thus found that the road to rate stabilization was a thorny one. He found it difficult to operate in the spirit of harmony, in which mutual concessions were imperative. Although he had observed that no competitive advantage that he could secure for the Missouri Pacific would be as profitable as an all-around agreement, it was difficult for him to apply this lesson. He had spent a lifetime in a contrary pattern. He had learned from experience that competitive advantages led to corporate profits and to increases in security values. He was now living in a new environment in which this sequence was no longer true. When rate cuts were renewed in February, 1890, security prices were as badly demoralized as railroad rates. When in early May, on the contrary, it seemed that the railroad presidents would be able to end the rate wars, stock values increased to an extent which led at least one writer to declare that this period was "among the most remarkable occurrences that Wall Street [had] seen in some years."[^47]

After cessation of the violent rate wars of the early part of the year, Gould set himself to work to create a more permanent administrative framework for the maintenance of rate schedules in the southwestern area. After weeks of negotiation, he succeeded in forming what he called his "ideal" association—the Southwestern Railroad & Steamship Association—which included all lines south of Kansas City and west of the Missouri River. The administrative organization consisted of an executive committee of five "with powers as autocratic as [were] those of the Czar of Russia." This committee was controlled by the representatives of Gould, Huntington, and the Atchison lines.[^48] The decision of a majority of the executive committee was final. Gould apparently tied himself hand and foot. He could order no change in rates on the Missouri Pacific which would hurt his competitors, except with the consent of the new association's executive committee.

It was a short, clearly written contract. A financial writer who had examined the other compacts made in the previous decade, declared it to be "one of the shortest and strongest documents of the kind ever formulated."[^49] Gould had taken the leadership in drawing up this agreement. He had long contended for a firm compact and was satisfied with it. A few weeks later he concluded an arrangement with the Atchison for the limiting of new extensions and for the maintenance of rates.[^50] This was the kind of agreement which the Atchison thought that it had with Gould in the early eighties. For some time thereafter Gould and the Atchison group worked in harmony. Since Huntington also had been working closely with Gould, it appeared that these executives might be able to work out an arrangement that would dominate the Southwest and pave the way for the promotion of rate stability, and the return of railroad earning power.

The conclusion of the agreement thus strengthened the prospects of all the southwestern roads. Beyond that it increased the personal prestige and power of Gould as a railroad leader. When the southwestern presidents met about a month later after the formulation of the new agreement, a spirit of peace and harmony prevailed like a "flock of turtle doves," remarked an observer.[^51] With the same volume of traffic the roads found they were earning more than at any time since the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act almost four years before. Gould felt encouraged to resume his activity in behalf of co-operation and united action as an alternative to competitive rivalry. He again brought forth his clearing-house plan, suggesting that it could be used as a vehicle for the unified operation of all the western railroads. A group of New York bankers, dissatisfied with the obsolete Interstate Commerce Railway Association, appointed a committee of railroad presidents to devise a plan for a new association on lines somewhat similar to the clearing-house idea. The committee planned to discuss the subject with Gould and Huntington, among others.

Active consideration meanwhile was given to another Gould proposal. He had originally brought this idea to the attention of railroad presidents in November and December of 1888 in the conferences which preceded the formation of the presidents' agreement. At that time he advocated the abolition of all freight agencies of individual roads and the establishment of a single agency at each important traffic center. That agency would bill traffic in such a way that each line would receive its proportion of through and competitive business. Gould estimated that in addition to maintaining the rate structure, the scheme would produce an annual saving of between $2,000,000 and $3,000,000. This line of reasoning was taken up in the summer of 1890 by A. F. Walker, chairman of the Interstate Commerce Railway Association, and elaborated before the Senate Committee on Interstate Commerce. Walker referred to the increasing expense of solicitation, to the unnecessary increase in competitive train service, which he said was sapping the revenues of carriers everywhere. Through trains were being duplicated in all directions. These unnecessary expenses involved in unregulated competition amounted "to millions of dollars annually; probably fifty million would be far within the mark."[^52] This was the beginning of an argument which has lasted from that day to the present.

Walker, a few months after presenting these views to the Senate Committee, issued a call for a meeting to reconstruct the association and to remedy existing conditions, which, he said, in a short time would make "receivers the managers of most of the western roads."[^53] He insisted further that the roads should discard independent action in making competitive rates, and should put the subject into the hands of a central agency, responsible only to the presidents and directors of the member lines. Walker was talking the language of Gould, and emphasizing the latter's arguments advanced over the past two years. Walker was calling a meeting to renew or to rebuild an existing organization in order to establish an administrative framework along lines which Gould had just completed in the Southwest. It seemed again, as it had two years before, that Gould would be able to take the leadership in the West, and work out a proposal upon lines similar to those he had already perfected in the Southwest. Whether or not he would have been able to impose his ideas on other western presidents cannot of course be established. Before the railroad presidents could be called together to consider the new proposals, however, Gould had already taken other steps which again upset the western equilibrium. Again he moved in the direction of competitive acquisition. Again he moved for the purpose of acquiring advantages for the Missouri Pacific. Again he demonstrated his inability to work in harmony and in peace in the light of a settled pattern. And again he justified the opposition of those western railroad men who had persistently fought any proposals designed and sponsored by him. Gould probably thought that he could not be certain whether one policy or another could be successful; whether a policy of a competitive advantage or competitive stability would prevail. So he decided to experiment.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXVIII

[^1]: See on this point Phila. Press, March 20, 1885; March 23, 1885.
[^2]: Burlington archives, Huntington to Adams, Nov. 5, 1885.
[^3]: Ibid., Perkins to Adams, Nov. 9, 1885.
[^4]: Ibid., Adams to Perkins, Nov. 9, 1885.
[^5]: Ibid., Perkins to Hughitt, Feb. 24, 1888.
[^6]: Ibid., Perkins to H. B. Stone, May 4, 1888.
[^7]: The quotation is from the language used by Railroad Commissioners of Kansas, cited in R. R. Gaz., Jan. 13, 1888, 32.
[^8]: Known hereafter as the Stickney road.
[^9]: This is the opinion of the president of the Wabash Western—the company which owned the lines of the Wabash west of the Mississippi River—in the 1888 annual report of that road, cited in Ry. Review, March 30, 1889, 173.
[^10]: Phila. North American, April 27, 1887.
[^11]: Kiernan's News Agency, cited in Stockholder, Sept. 14, 1887.
[^12]: Chron., Sept. 17, 1887, 369.
[^13]: Stockholder, Sept. 26, 1891.
[^14]: R. R. Gaz., Feb. 10, 1888, 98. The phrase "totally demoralized" is used by Chron., Feb. 4, 1888, 145, in discussing the rates between Chicago and St. Paul, Chicago and Omaha, Chicago and Kansas City, and Chicago and St. Fouis; and Hughitt, president of the Chicago & Northwestern referred at about the same time to "existing disastrous conditions." See Burlington archives, letter of Perkins to Albert Fink, Feb. 9, 1888.
[^15]: Bradstreet, Oct. 18, 1890, 662.
[^16]: New York Times, Jan. 22, 1888.
[^17]: New York Tribune, March 25, 1888.
[^18]:Stockholder, April 25, 1888.
[^19]: Ibid., Oct. 22, 1888.
[^20]: Chron., Sept. 29, 1888, 368.
[^21]: 159 Interstate Commerce Commission Reports (1929), 322.
[^22]: New York Times, Nov. 28, 1888.
[^23]: R. R. Gaz., Nov. 30, 1888, 796. The plan was published also in New York Times, Nov. 28, 1888.
[^24]: New York Sun, Dec. 16, 1888.
[^25]: New York Times, Dec. 4, 1888, citing Stockholder.
[^26]: New York Herald, Nov. 25, 1888.
[^27]: For evidence on this point see New York Tribune, Dec. 16, 1888. The lack of faith in Gould's leadership was also evident upon other occasions. See for example, New York Tribune, Feb. 24, 1889, which credits an unnamed railroad man as having said, in referring to Gould's voting trust scheme, that the scheme may be good but that the railroad men would not try it.
[^28]: Iron Age, Jan. 10, 1889, 63.
[^29]: For summary of text of plan, see Chron., Jan. 12, 1889, 67-8.
[^30]: This is the wording of the resolution approved by the board of directors, cited in New York Times, Feb. 21, 1889.
[^31]: Bradstreet, March 2, 1889, 143.
[^32]: Burlington archives, "Memorandum" on Interstate Commerce Railway Association, dated June 26, 1889.
[^33]: Boston Transcript, Feb. 11, 1890.
[^34]: Phila. Press, March 14, 1889.
[^35]: Stockholder, July 20, 1889.
[^36]: Phila. Press, Sept. 14, 1889.
[^37]: San Francisco Bulletin, cited in Ry. Review, March 31, 1888, 176.
[^38]: Ry. Review, Oct. 26, 1889, 620.
[^39]: Dodge Papers, Adams to G. M. Dodge, Oct. 23, 1889.
[^40]: New York Times, March 9, 1890.
[^41]: R. R. Gaz., Feb. 14, 1890, 120; Feb. 21, 1890, 136.
[^42]: So said Gould in New York Times, April 30, 1890.
[^43]: Ibid., April 28, 1890.
[^44]: This was the language of Chron., May 17, 1890, 679.
[^45]: New York Times, May 23, 1890.
[^46]: Ibid., May 28, 1890.
[^47]: Bradstreet, May 3, 1890, 280.
[^48]: New York Tribune, Sept. 19, 1890.
[^49]: Ibid., Sept. 30, 1890.
[^50]: New York Times, Nov. 22, 1890.
[^51]: Ry. World, Nov. 1, 1890, 1039.
[^52]: The arguments of Walker are summarized in Ry. Review, July 5, 1890, 386.
[^53]: Bradstreet, Oct. 18, 1890, 662.