# Chapter XXIX - Gould Experiments

By 1890 Gould's holdings had become well stabilized. He had the controlling interest in three dividend-paying enterprises—the Missouri Pacific, the Manhattan, and the Western Union. The stocks of the latter two were desirable investments. Neither had any substantial competition; the Manhattan in fact had none. In the spring of 1891 the Manhattan bought control of another transit line: the Suburban Rapid Transit Company. Morgan, who represented the interests of the owners of the latter, was so satisfied with the investment caliber of the Manhattan stock that he recommended an exchange of that stock for the Suburban's. The Manhattan, whose control was acquired by Gould at the end of a receivership, was on a 6 per cent dividend basis. Its credit was one of the best and the Morgan firm bid actively for the opportunity of buying its bonds for resale to customers on a low yield basis. Morgan joined the board of directors, and Gould could say with considerable pride that the Manhattan, financially, was one of the best properties in the country.

Western Union was also prosperous, and had likewise achieved a position of relative freedom from competition. From the host of competitors that sprang up to challenge the water-logged Western Union in 1881, only the Postal remained.

Aside from his third major holding—the Missouri Pacific—Gould had numerous interests in widely scattered industrial and railway auxiliary properties. His holdings in the St. Louis Bridge and Tunnel properties were valuable. These were merged with others in the area, and in exchange for his stocks he secured interests in the enlarged and financially profitable Terminal Railroad Association. In this case again, as in many others, he worked hand in hand with Morgan.

In industrial enterprises Gould also occupied an important position. He was an extensive stockholder in coal-mining properties in Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Iowa, and Illinois. The leading outlet for bituminous coal at that time was found in the railroad industry. As Gould extended his railroad system he purchased coal lands, transferred them to new companies, and then made the latters' stock valuable by contracts made with his railroads. From the Wabash, for example, he secured profitable contracts for the purchase of coal in Illinois and Iowa; while in southeastern Missouri he organized a coal company which sold coal to the Missouri Pacific.[^1] It is impossible to state how profitable these coal companies were. Although data on their earnings and dividends are scanty and fugitive, it may be inferred, but not with any degree of certainty, that for a time at least the coal companies succeeded in selling merchandise to the railroad companies controlled by Gould at prices in excess of the prevailing market. At other times, as a result of price wars in this competitive industry, the price of coal fell below cost, and on such occasions the Gould-controlled coal companies operated at a loss.[^2] His major railroad holdings were represented by the Missouri Pacific stock.

On this stock a dividend of 6 per cent was paid from 1880 to 1882. It was later increased to 7 per cent, in April, 1888, reduced to 6, and in the following July to 4, only to be passed in the fall of 1891. The dividend record of the Missouri Pacific was unique. In the decade of the eighties its stock stood on the same plane with the stock of some well managed properties. The investment rating of its securities was superior to those of Huntington's far-flung transcontinental lines. A considerable body of investment opinion throughout the eighties looked confidently to the elimination of the Missouri Pacific dividend. The collapse in 1884 appeared to lend substance to these expectations, yet those who sold the stock were disappointed.

In seeking an explanation of the good earnings of the Missouri Pacific in the eighties two factors must be considered. Gould in the first place followed policies which consistently favored the Missouri Pacific as against his other railroad properties. In the movement of traffic, in the division of rates, and in the distribution of terminal allowances, the Missouri Pacific was favored, and the Wabash, International, Kansas & Texas, and the Texas & Pacific—to place the most charitable interpretation on Gould's policies—were not favored. The earnings of the Missouri Pacific were bolstered and the earnings of the other properties were impaired.

In the second place, prior to the expansion program of 1886-1887, the Missouri Pacific was well protected from excessive railroad competition. Between Kansas City and St. Louis, aside from the excessively circuitous route of the Frisco, the road had only the competition of the Alton, the favored connection of the Atchison. The rates on the Missouri Pacific, therefore, changed little in the early and middle eighties. There were few price wars, and the relatively stable rates, accompanied by a rise in traffic, disturbed only by occasional local crop failures, produced a rise in earnings.

The Missouri Pacific was thus able to pay a dividend at the very time when its associated companies produced only financial disaster for their security holders. The demoralizing rate wars of the late eighties, however, introduced a chain of events which led to the interruption in the forward march of the Missouri Pacific's earnings. In this environment Gould was helpless in the face of the forces which he had done so much to unleash, and for the first time he resorted to a policy designed to replace competition by co-operative action between independently owned and operated properties. It was a new field of activity to Gould. Previous co-operative moves were part of a program of expansion, and were normally accompanied by aggression in territory not covered by the agreement; or, after a lapse of some months, were followed by further moves into the very territory in which stability had been achieved.

In 1887-88, however, when his building program came to an abrupt halt, as did the program of almost all western railroad competitors, Gould made no further aggressive moves. It has already been shown how in the following two years he made an effort to achieve through agreements with other roads a stability in rates which he, in company with almost all other railroad men, had hoped would lead to stable earnings. In this he was disappointed. Despite the leadership taken by railroad men and bankers the rate stability lasted only a few weeks. The competitive forces soon expressed themselves again in repeated rate wars. By the end of 1890 Gould was convinced that stabilization by rate agreements would not of itself serve as a means of solving the problem of transforming higher revenues into higher profits.

Gould was not certain which policy to follow. It was evident that competition carried to extreme limits without any basis for united action would be suicidal. On the other hand, a commitment in behalf of the principle of co-operation would not be advisable if the Missouri Pacific were weakened. He seems to have decided therefore, some time in the summer or fall of 1890, to experiment with both policies. In the Southwest, after reaching an agreement with Huntington and the Atchison lines through the Southwestern Association, he prepared a plan for co-operative action among all the roads in this territory. His interest in co-operation, however, did not lead him to overlook the necessities of his own properties, and he decided to strengthen at the same time the position of the Missouri Pacific. His expansion program had placed the Union Pacific in an unenviable position. That road, at its eastern termini of Omaha and Kansas City, had traded traffic with roads which, except for the Burlington, were friendly connections. Since these roads had no lines west of the Missouri, they had no competitive interests which clashed with those of the Union Pacific.

Now, with the Rock Island in Kansas, the Northwestern in Wyoming, and the St. Paul in Kansas City, the Union Pacific found it necessary to change its policy. It could no longer trade with all friendly connections. To Gould the Union Pacific's traffic agreement with the Northwestern obliged each road to trade with the other exclusively. The Rock Island and the St. Paul were also dissatisfied, and they urged that the Union Pacific permit them to use its bridge at Omaha jointly. A refusal would lead them to build a bridge of their own. In May of 1890 an arrangement was made whereby in return for an annual rent, plus the assumption of a proportion of the joint expenses, the Union Pacific permitted the other companies to use the bridge for both freight and passenger business. By use of the bridge and the auxiliary tracks, the Rock Island secured a route to Denver, and the St. Paul, by using the Rock Island's line, also obtained a part of the transcontinental traffic. The business of both roads was transferred to the Union Pacific at Denver for further movement.

It was an arrangement which suited all three participating roads. The Northwestern raised no objection, but Gould was not happy. To the extent that the Rock Island and the St. Paul moved more business, the Missouri Pacific moved less. Gould although dissatisfied made no aggressive move. In October, 1890, however, at the very time when he was working out the agreement for the maintenance of rates in southwestern territory, the Union Pacific made a further move. Adams demanded that eastern connections increase the compensation of the Union Pacific for the movement of business to and from the Missouri River. "Our proportion of the through rate has been too low," he said. "Our connections have been taking the lion's share. We have been accepting a pro-rate on the basis of 60 cents to the Missouri River from Chicago. Formerly those roads pro-rated with us on a 75-cent basis. Rates from Chicago to the Missouri River have been restored by our eastern connections, but they still want us to pro-rate on the 60-cent basis. This we will not do. The Northwestern readily consented to allow us the increased division, and we simply notified the other roads that they must allow us the same, or we would have to refuse to do any through business with them."[^3] The Union Pacific's eastern connections refused to grant the demand, and on November 1 all divisions with the Union Pacific were withdrawn. The Union Pacific therefore was obliged to pay local or higher rates over all eastern connections except the Northwestern.

The Missouri Pacific, at least from the standpoint of ability to compete for transcontinental traffic, was placed in a weak position. By virtue of the joint bridge arrangement, the Rock Island and the St. Paul could pick up traffic from the Union Pacific at Denver, carry it over non-Union Pacific lines to the Missouri River, and then beyond via their own lines to Chicago. The Northwestern could carry traffic exclusively for the Union Pacific between Chicago and Omaha. The Missouri Pacific was a loser. Gould therefore looked upon the Union Pacific as an enemy of the Missouri Pacific. Early in 1890 he had no interest in the company's stock. If he acquired control of the road he might introduce an unstable factor by making it more difficult to eliminate disastrous rate wars. To a lesser extent he had open to him the same choice of policies which were available a decade earlier as a result of his acquisition of the Wabash. It would appear that after a decade of experience with the disturbing character of competitive as contrasted with co-operative policies, Gould would have chosen a different course. He decided nevertheless to acquire control of the Union Pacific.

That road was then burdened with a heavy debt. A substantial part of its bonds had been issued in the early seventies for the purpose of retrieving past financial mistakes, and the proceeds had therefore not been invested in plant and equipment. Proceeds of additional securities had been invested in property which brought slight return. In 1889, furthermore, it impaired its financial strength (from the short-run point of view) by a blunder in financing the acquisition of a controlling interest in the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company—a line which afforded the Union Pacific an outlet to Portland. The Union Pacific, after raising part of the funds by the sale of bonds, discovered that it could sell no more bonds on favorable terms, and accordingly withheld their sale pending the return of a more suitable money market. Meanwhile it borrowed money on the bonds as collateral. The money market, instead of improving, became worse; the floating debt remained and even increased.

The paralyzing rate wars and the disturbance in railroad earnings made it impossible to pay the floating debt. The liquidation in the security markets was intensified by events in the British investment market. In order to raise cash the bankers sold railroad securities on American exchanges. The market turned weak in early summer, and became acutely so in September and October. Despite the purchase of bonds by the United States Treasury and the resultant increase in the surplus reserves of the banks, security liquidation developed. By late October and early November a panic was on. Bank reserves dropped below the legal minimum; loans were called, and the stock market suffered from the most violent break in prices since May, 1884.

November, 1890, found Gould in a comfortable position. According to different estimates he had anywhere from $15,000,000 to $20,000,000 in cash, available for investment.[^4] When the stock market crashed Gould was ready to buy. The price of Union Pacific was low, partly because of the general market weakness and partly because of the road's floating debt. In 1890 he and his associates, particularly Dillon and Frederick Ames, bought stock. The fate of the company was in the hands of its floating-debt creditors. Gould attacked the company's credit, at first secretly, then openly, through an interview in a New York paper. Adams sought aid from both Drexel, Morgan & Company and the Vanderbilt interests. If they agreed to take over the floating debt, they could take over the management. They refused.[^5] Gould assumed this responsibility. He made an arrangement with some of the leading creditors, and agreed to lend the road enough money to meet its January coupons and stave off receivership. Adams resigned and Gould and his followers assumed control. Dillon, president under the Gould control in the 1874-84 decade, again became president.

The Union Pacific acquisition, although perhaps the most valuable, was by no means the only addition to the list of Gould's holdings in the panic weeks of 1890. From the southeastern end of the Missouri Pacific at Memphis, Tennessee, ramified the lines of the Richmond Terminal system. On the face of things, looking at the map and without examining any of the complicated underlying traffic realities, an observer might conclude that if a community of interests were built up between the Missouri Pacific and this property, a new traffic route could be established between southern Kansas and southeastern points. Those in charge of the policies of the Richmond Terminal, though not operating railroad men, were hard traders. Since Gould could come to no satisfactory agreement with them, he took advantage of the low prices, and bought about 15 per cent of its stock.[^6] In December he and Sage were elected to the board.

This news was greeted with enthusiasm and anticipation of good things to come. A newspaper in Atlanta declared that Gould would soon go on the board of a road which connected with the Richmond Terminal and give the latter an entrance to the seaboard at Savannah. This road—the Central of Georgia—also had connections with a steamship line operating from Savannah to New York City. Gould, this newspaper declared, would "be the power in the Richmond Terminal system" and would give the Central of Georgia an "enormous" amount of traffic from the Missouri Pacific.[^7]

Gould's power in railroad affairs was now substantially increased. A Philadelphia paper reporter friendly to Gould observed that Gould was the "master of our railroad system,"[^8] and a New York writer was certain that Gould had "not only the key to the situation, but something more." He had a plan to settle vexatious railroad questions which would stabilize values, and his work from this time on must be constructive.[^9] The Burlington management, however, was not impressed. "I guess," wrote Forbes, "we can get on quite as well with the new as the old rule."[^10]

While Gould had thus strengthened his position in the railway industry, he continued his search for a solution to the problem of eliminating rate wars by developing the possibilities of co-operative action. In common with others he was convinced that such action was essential. There was scarcely an important annual railroad report of a western line which did not refer to the urgent necessity of concerted action. That of the St. Paul, for example, declared: "Unrestrained competition will, in the end, destroy all competition,"[^11] while the Burlington's report insisted that "without some method of effective co-operation competing lines must become bankrupt, and in the end consolidated."[^12]

Gould was alive to the necessities of the situation. After the southwestern pool had been completed in mid-October, he became active in working out a plan for joint railroad action. On the very first day of the panicky market of November 11, he announced approval of Walker's suggestions for the replacement of competitive solicitors by joint agencies.[^13] He also enlisted the aid of Morgan, who talked things over with him both at St. Louis and later at his (Morgan's) office in New York City.[^14] Gould worked out his views in a memorandum which he asked railroad presidents to sign. The memorandum contemplated a number of far-reaching innovations. Those lines which did not enter into the agreement would be blacklisted. Business would be divided among the several roads, and the building of parallel lines would be prohibited for five years.[^15] Though Gould succeeded in securing the signatures of a number of presidents, he accomplished nothing.

Morgan then issued a call for a meeting of western railroad presidents at his home on December 15 to draft a new plan. If Gould believed that because of his accretion of corporate power he could enlist the confidence of railroad presidents, he was soon to be undeceived. The idea that he would step out of his activities as a competitive businessman interested in initiating policies calculated to advance the interests of his own railroads in order to save the general situation was too novel to be widely accepted. The "public is a little shy," remarked one of the leading railroad journals, in believing that Gould could inspire a reform which would eliminate rate-cutting on the western and southwestern roads. Perkins, Cable, and Hughitt, among others, were not impressed by Gould's reforming activities. When the railroad presidents met at Morgan's house, therefore, it was not at all surprising that Morgan presented a plan, prepared, not by Gould, but by others. Morgan stated that a simple and comprehensive, although ineffective, plan had been agreed upon by the Vanderbilts and the Pennsylvania, and that based upon this he had prepared another. His plan included the suggestion that a committee should establish and maintain uniform rates between competitive points. This was a statement of objective rather than of ways and means. Everybody subscribed to the idea. The new committee would administer the joint agencies for securing traffic at competitive points. This was Gould's pet hobby. Morgan's plan also contemplated the dismissal of any company official who changed an established tariff. This was also a favorite idea with Gould, who long had advocated the use of sanctions without which, he declared, the agreement could not be made to function. Morgan, in including provisions in the agreement calculated to please Gould, was playing the traditional part of the conservative banker, who is frequently cast in the role of an arbitrator. He thereby solves many a business dispute, especially if the dispute involves conflicting personalities or varying interpretations of a particular contract. In this case the differences between Gould and the other presidents arose from deep-seated competitive forces. Railroad executives looking to their own property interests did not appreciate the necessity, as did Morgan, of making concessions for the purpose of pleasing Gould or any other competitor. The draft of the agreement, as finally approved, eliminated the joint soliciting agencies of the traffic pool. Instead the plan set up an agency which on application by a railroad could make an equitable division of business between the lines interested, "upon such basis and upon such lawful manner" as was deemed advisable. The agreement contained no provision calling for the elimination of the construction of duplicate railroad lines. A body known as the commissioners, headed by a president, served as the supervisory agency to carry out the agreement, although its decisions were subject to review by an advisory board. The agreement declared that the decisions made either by the commissioners or the advisory board should not be construed to deprive the directors of any road of their right to fix rates and make rules and regulations affecting their own business.

Although the agreement had dropped most of the provisions for which Gould had so long contended, he expressed himself as satisfied. In many respects the new arrangement was similar to the one adopted two years before, and which within a few months had so ingloriously collapsed. There were, however, several new features. Withdrawal from the association could be made only by formal action of the presidents themselves. Penalty for infraction of the decisions of the association was made more severe. The member roads agreed to discharge any officials found guilty of cutting rates. The new plan was not greeted with the same enthusiasm as had been accorded the first. Perhaps the railroad presidents themselves were not particularly hopeful. They said nothing for publication, though to sophisticated observers the railroad meeting was a disappointment. It "fell awfully flat," declared the New York critic of Gould and Morgan, and of Drexel, Morgan & Company.[^16] To make the new arrangement work it was necessary that its spirit more than its letter be obeyed. Compacts and agreements had characterized the railroad industry for more than ten years. While some lasted longer than others, each had collapsed.

Meanwhile the Missouri Pacific's earnings were declining. It was apparent that the road would soon be obliged to follow its three major competitors—the Union Pacific, the Atchison and the Southern Pacific—and pay no dividends. In order to maintain earnings it was essential that Gould use his newly acquired power over the Union Pacific to promote rate stability. If that road were exploited for the purpose of benefiting the Missouri Pacific, he would be following the same tactics which had repeatedly unsettled railroad rate structures in the seventies and eighties. Such a policy would invite retaliation by roads losing traffic to the Missouri Pacific. Such retaliation involved dangers far more serious than those of former years. In the earlier period competitive tactics left a number of small lines so helpless, that they were in no position to retaliate. By the late eighties and early nineties, however, most of these companies had by consolidation and acquisition been eliminated. The competition now was mainly between powerful railroad properties.

Despite these dangers Gould announced his aggressive policy, not in words but in deeds. Scarcely had the presidents met in Morgan's home than, as the dominant factor in the Union Pacific, he made his first move, announcing that the joint arrangement by which the Rock Island and the St. Paul were authorized to use the Omaha bridge was invalid. Both roads had announced that they would soon move cars across the bridge to Denver and the Pacific Coast. The bridge contracts, said Gould, were "the most ridiculous he ever met in his railroad experience."[^17] Before he took a definite position and declared these contracts illegal, he secured able legal judgment confirming his position. John F. Dillon was still counsel for the Union Pacific. In the spring he had approved the contract as being within the jurisdiction of the company's charter. In the winter he committed a right-about-face and concluded that the contract was beyond the powers of the contracting parties. Cancellation of the contract was strongly resisted by both the Rock Island and St. Paul, and the case went to court.

In using the Union Pacific as a competitive weapon, Gould did not overlook another obvious opportunity to aid his Missouri Pacific—he also canceled the traffic agreement between the former and the Northwestern. It was a risky, though a highly promising policy. Wherever he could, he had the Union Pacific divert its trade eastbound from the Northwestern to the Missouri Pacific. The Northwestern, with the co-operation of the Vanderbilt interests, then renewed oft-threatened plans to build from Wyoming west. The New York Central and the Northwestern managements, for example, made a trip over the latter's lines to determine the feasibility of such expansion.[^18]

These moves and countermoves involved the Missouri Pacific only in its western territory in Colorado, Missouri, and Kansas. In the Southwest there was still a strong prospect that Gould would unite his interests with those of the Atchison and the Huntington lines. These roads controlled three of the five members of the executive committee of the southwestern pool. If they could decide upon a basis for the division of traffic among themselves, it was probable that rates could be stabilized. In the first few months of 1891, active negotiations proceeded in an effort to arrive at a solution. From time to time trouble was encountered and it seemed that rate stability never would be reached. Early in February the roads between Chicago and St. Louis reduced their rates to southwestern points from 10 to 30 per cent, with the Atchison taking the initiative.[^19] Early in April the Texas Railroad Commission reduced rates, thus making it even more difficult for the larger railroad properties, even if they arrived at a solution, to keep rates stable. Nevertheless, negotiations continued. It was proposed that the properties combine their interests in a joint-ownership plan. The major stockholders would delegate certain powers to a board of arbitration with power superior to that of individual boards of directors. The board would represent joint ownership, and would act through power received directly from the stockholders.[^20] Both Gould and Huntington were in favor of the scheme.

These men, however, were hard bargainers, and each insisted upon a division of the business unacceptable to the other. Gould, in order to give the Missouri Pacific a more adequate share of the available traffic, followed a policy of expediency. Due to a change in the tariff, large shipments of sugar were available for movement from the eastern seaboard to western markets. The basis of distribution of this traffic among the western roads was important. Gould believed that if the Missouri Pacific could get the lion's share of the business, its earnings would increase and his bargaining position against Huntington improve. The road therefore cut rates on sugar from forty-eight cents to forty cents, and since the other roads refused to meet these reductions, it hauled most of the traffic. It was not a secret cut since the tariff had been duly filed with the Interstate Commerce Commission. It was, nevertheless, a sharp trick which Gould and the Missouri Pacific played on the other western roads. Gould thus, in order to carry out some competitive deal in the Southwest, had been the first to violate the agreement made by the western railroads in mid-December to maintain rates.

The first quarterly meeting of the advisory board of the new Western Traffic Association was scheduled for the fifteenth of April. Its serious problem was the action to be taken on the sugar rate cuts. The board stated officially that the matters to be considered at its first meeting were "of such importance that, if unacted upon at an early date, the integrity and life" of the association were threatened.[^21] Nevertheless, neither Gould nor Huntington nor any of the representatives of their roads attended the meeting. The members who did attend, only to find that because of the absence of a quorum no business could be done, were bitter. One member was particularly outspoken: "It was a dirty trick on the part of Mr. Gould," he declared, "to allow us to go out there [Chicago] for nothing."[^22]

The board called another meeting in early May which Gould attended. He was now all for compromise. Admitting that the Missouri Pacific had cut sugar rates, he expressed willingness to abide by any decision the board might make, though he personally disclaimed any responsibility for having made the cut. That was done by the traffic manager on his own responsibility. Here was a beautifully clear case for punitive action by the board, and the board found it easy to punish the offender. It decided that the Missouri Pacific had violated the agreement and should discharge the guilty party. The decision was accepted with good grace and the road promptly discharged the traffic manager. It is needless to say that Gould soon arranged to give the "goat" another position.

Despite the cuts in sugar tariffs, the rate situation in the first half of 1891 was well stabilized. There was then less rate-cutting and underhanded competition, and perhaps fewer secret rebates, than there had been for some years. It is not possible to measure the extent to which this movement could be attributed to the new association. Railroad traffic at the time was moving in good volume. Stable rates, however, did not mean higher rates. Most states had already established regulatory commissions which were closely watching the rate structure, and that meant lower rates.

Though Gould had made advances to the Union Pacific to enable it to pay its interest, the floating debt kept mounting. Its ownership was widely scattered. Some of the notes had been placed with locomotive and car companies, while others were held by commercial banks and trust companies—some by Drexel, Morgan & Company, and of these a portion was endorsed by Gould and some of his associates.

In the first half of 1891 the Union Pacific safely passed through each crisis and, despite the increase in the size of its debt, no pressure was exerted by creditors. In April at the annual meeting, the company was authorized to execute a new mortgage to secure bonds of $25,000,000, of which $10,000,000 would be sold immediately. Gould of course strongly supported the bond issue. "There can be nothing better than the security we propose," he declared, and he continued, "Of course I shall take some of the bonds. I don't know a better security."[^23] The money markets however were not receptive, and none of the bonds were sold. The heavy interest payments due on July 1 were met in part from funds advanced again by Gould. Early in August a sudden drop in price of Union Pacific stock heralded the arrival of a climax. While Gould was then in the Far West, a number of the holders of the floating debt demanded payment.[^24] With the market for railroad securities almost closed, it seemed impossible to raise large sums of money. One alternative to receivership remained: Holders of the Union Pacific might be induced to accept notes running for a three- to five-year period in exchange for their demand notes. Those who refused to accept the exchange, provided they did not represent a substantial percentage of the floating debt, would be paid in cash.

Gould in the Far West announced that he was prepared to organize a syndicate to carry out the plan. If the notes could not be sold, the syndicate would advance the funds, and Gould and Sage, respectively, for their personal accounts, agreed to lend $5,000,000 and $1,000,000.[^25] The effort, however, failed and it was Morgan who came to the rescue. Though he was not the banker for the Union Pacific, his firm was one of the holders of the floating debt. A $2,000,000 Union Pacific note held by the Morgan firm moreover was endorsed by Gould.[^26]

Within less than a week after Morgan had agreed to undertake the task, a realistic plan had been submitted to the Union Pacific's board. Almost all of the treasury securities of the borrowing road were to be trusteed as collateral for a proposed note issue. The par value of the collateral was about $40,000,000; while the face value of the new securities amounted to $24,000,000. The par value of the collateral did not, however, represent its market value. Some securities had no market. They were stocks or bonds of small roads with no independent earning power. Their earnings were associated with the earnings and policies of the Union Pacific, which owned all of their stocks.

It was neither possible nor necessary at that time to sell $24,000,000 of securities. The plan was based upon the idea that many of the holders of the floating debt would exchange their paper for new notes because of their confidence in the integrity and judgment of Morgan. Creditors trusted him, and distrusted Gould. Many banks acceded to the suggestion of Morgan, and exchanged their holdings for the new notes. Gould agreed to take $1,000,000, and in exchange for this subscription, he was relieved from his endorsement on some Union Pacific paper held by the Drexel, Morgan firm.[^27]

By mid-September holders of about $14,000,000 of the paper had agreed to accept the new notes. To finance essential needs it was necessary to sell only between $5,000,000 and $6,000,000 to new investors. The cash thus raised would be used to pay off those creditors who needed the cash. The $14,000,000 accepted by the creditors included Gould's commitment, and Gould also agreed to buy $1,000,000 of the new notes. Morgan encountered difficulty in selling the notes and it appeared that the Union Pacific crisis was not yet over. Gould tried to wiggle out of his commitment—at least so Morgan believed. He said that Gould was "juggling with the property"; he was reported to be "indignant" and to have informed Gould that unless he acted frankly he would be hustled out of the road.[^28] According to another story Morgan told Gould to come to his office. Gould said he was ill, to which Morgan replied that he would be in his office all day. Gould came, and when he left Morgan's office after an hour's conference Morgan, according to this account, "looked angry and Gould sulky." Within an hour or two, however, it was announced that Gould had subscribed to the new notes.[^29]

Though the crisis had been surmounted, Gould's power over the Union Pacific was weakened. He could no longer as the controlling factor in its affairs, even had he owned the majority of the stock, exploit the Union Pacific for the benefit of his favorite child—the Missouri Pacific. The policies of the Union Pacific were in the hands of the creditors' committee, and that committee was dominated by Morgan.

Gould meanwhile was confronted with increasing difficulties in handling the Missouri Pacific. It was no longer possible to use either the Wabash or the Texas & Pacific to bolster the earnings. Both properties were watched by aggressive minority interests. Although he individually was the largest holder of the Wabash stock, a sizable proportion was concentrated in the hands of foreign investors. The holders of the income bonds were also well organized, and did not propose to permit the Wabash to reduce its earnings in order to help the Missouri Pacific.

The same situation prevailed on the Texas & Pacific, though here the minority stockholders were not so well organized. On this property, also, there was an income bond. The road's inability to pay interest on that bond presented a threat to Gould's control. The income mortgage provided that if by 1892 interest was not paid the income bondholders could, through the trustees, take possession and operate the property.

The loss of the western arm of the southwestern system, controlled by the Kansas & Texas, proved to be another damaging blow to the Missouri Pacific. The Kansas & Texas had become an aggressive competitor. The most serious factor in impairing the earnings and financial strength of the Missouri Pacific, however, was the war of rates. All Gould's efforts in the direction of co-operation had been fruitless and the rate wars continued. The two presidential agreements had accomplished little. Though the southwestern pool had more promise, it finally broke on the rock of Huntington's independence. It was clear that the pool despite some apparent success was but a hollow shell.

By the summer and fall of 1891 Gould had found it impossible to raise rates from their low levels. The Atchison by this time had passed its dividend; the Southern Pacific had never paid one, and the Missouri Pacific had also reduced its dividend. The break in earnings had demoralized the market for railroad securities and had made it difficult for the Missouri Pacific to complete its financial program. Gould and some of his associates therefore made personal advances. In the spring of 1890 the Missouri Pacific succeeded in floating one of those ingeniously arranged bonds, designed to attract the investor who wanted to combine security with profit. The road offered the stockholders the privilege of buying a collateral trust bond at 95 with a bonus of one share of stock for each bond. Based upon the market price of the stock, the 5 per cent bond cost the Missouri Pacific stockholder about 87; or he could keep the stock, pay 95 for the bond, and hold the stock for a rise in value.

The financial problems of the Missouri Pacific were for the moment solved—but only for the moment. Rates were still low. Even though earnings were declining, the Missouri Pacific continued to pay dividends. Soon the road needed more funds—and the road was forced again to borrow. The money markets being closed, the company again borrowed, directly from Gould and Sage.

The new loans, made in the routine course of business, were not known to the financial community. Meanwhile the security markets reflecting the increase in railroad traffic due to large cereal grain crops, indulged in one of those exuberant upward movements which anticipate something that never happens. The rise in the market was stimulated by heavy London buying which in September reached "enormous proportions."[^30] Investors who sold in the fall of 1890 were buying in the fall of 1891. The rise was so pronounced that professional traders were astounded. Newspapers assured the investing public that the upward rise was based upon a record crop, that, to use the language of one of them, "A bull movement with such a basis has the most solid of foundations."[^31] The newspapers as so often before were playing the game of informed sellers, of which Gould was one. In the general rise the price of Missouri Pacific advanced, attaining a level in mid-September only slightly below the highest prices reached in 1889 and 1890. How many shares Gould sold in the rise is not known.

The realities of the situation were revealed in late September. In June Gould had insisted that Missouri Pacific was "intrinsically cheap," and that it was selling "far below its real value."[^32] Its floating debt, however, had again been increased, and it was soon revealed that Gould and Sage had advanced funds to the road. These fatal words, remarked the financial-weekly Gould critic, "form the epitaph which can be found on the tombstone standing over every distressed property which [had] fallen into the same management during the past twenty years."[^33] The dividend was passed and within a few days the price of the stock broke sharply from more than 76 to less than 55.

Almost at the end of his career, all of Gould's railroad properties had become non-dividend payers. He was still in control of four of theHere's the continuation of the formatted chapter:
