## Chapter XXX - Conclusion

In assessing the importance of a business leader, his contribution to the industry and to the public welfare must be considered. This is particularly true in an examination of business success in the free-enterprise economy of the period following the Civil War. Argument is still hot between those who deny and those who defend that system as the best means of affording to the community a high standard of living. Although it is probable that the unregulated capitalistic economy of the nineteenth century has been weakened, there is still no agreement upon the extent to which a regulated economy can exist without destroying the profit motives which make a free-enterprise system possible.

It is therefore particularly profitable to examine the contributions made both in terms of business advance and public service which were made by Gould in the generation following the Civil War. Gould was, and still remains, a business type. He had his virtues and he had his faults. His defects have been exaggerated beyond their true significance. Gould possessed a cold-blooded unscrupulousness which enabled him to take full advantage of the primitive nature of the art of corporate finance and the status of corporate law, and to adapt to his purposes the low state of political morals prevailing at the time.

What positive contribution did he make to the transportation and telegraph industries with which for the better part of his business life he was so closely associated? What contribution did he make to the well-being of the general public? How did he promote the general interests of the community? To many conservative businessmen of the time, interested primarily in the promotion of stability and in the maintenance of the earnings of well-established enterprises, Gould was a wrecker of existing values, "a destroyer of the peace,"[^1] to use the language of one of the careful businessmen of the time. He sold stocks short to depress their value and then frequently outwitted his short-selling associates by buying them back at low prices, even while his associates were still selling. This he did on a large scale with the Western Union Telegraph, and on a smaller scale with other corporations. He made contracts not to build railroads into the territories of his rivals, only to violate them when it was profitable for him to do so. He made rate agreements only to break them. He issued statements on security values merely to confute his opponents in the stock markets.

Strange to say, these very misstatements and continuous violations of the spirit if not of the letter of the contracts, enriched his contribution to the public welfare, even though they impaired, at least temporarily, the earning power of a large section of the railroad industry. Perhaps even stranger is the circumstance that the very factors which temporarily injured the industry, did in fact over the longer period aid it, and enhanced both its permanent value and its long-term earning capacity. Gould's violation of the understandings prohibiting the building of new roads, for example, led to the extensive rate wars which depressed rates and reduced railroad earnings. The reduction of dividends in 1884 and 1885 by eastern, and in the late eighties by western, railroads followed by the extensive receiverships in the early and middle nineties, were largely the result of the rate wars and the promiscuous building of new railroads. Yet the reduction in rates was of extraordinary benefit to consumers and producers. Although the immediate effects were disastrous to corporate earnings, the long-range effects were beneficial, not only to shippers and consumers but also to the railroads themselves. The depressed rates increased operating efficiency and lowered costs. This paved the way for a rise in traffic made possible in part by reduced rates. The lowered rates were permanent. The traffic and managerial alliances and understandings of the middle nineties and of the first decade of the present century, and the waves of railroad consolidations and acquisitions, did not produce any substantial rate increases.

It is however necessary to point out that for a part of his career, Gould was instrumental in raising rates. His acquisition of control of the Union Pacific, possessing the only transcontinental route of the seventies, was followed by the introduction of monopolistic policies. In the depression of the middle and late seventies, transcontinental rates over the combined Central Pacific-Union route were raised sharply through the united efforts of Huntington and Gould. Also, discriminations between shippers, classes of traffic, and geographical areas were imposed in order to increase railroad earnings.

Except for this phase of his career Gould, in quest of business advantages for the companies with which he was associated, fought for reduced rates. Together with McHenry, he was the leading factor in the reduction of rates on crude and refined oil that brought the cost of oil transportation down to the low levels of the late sixties and early seventies. Rockefeller took advantage of the railroad competition that Gould and McHenry initiated in order to exact the maximum business concessions for his refineries, and rates thus reduced were not increased. In fact the rate structure on the petroleum traffic was further corroded in the following decades. Gould's control of the Erie railway was also featured by the rate battles with Commodore Vanderbilt.

The most far-reaching effects on the railroad rate structure, however, were reflected in 1879 and in the eighties, following Gould's brilliant expansion program. In these years he repeatedly broke up rate structures and territorial agreements. He furthermore destroyed established rate and traffic pools in rapid succession. From 1879 until the late eighties, when the pursuit of this policy brought earnings and stock values to the lowest point attained since the late seventies, he consistently followed this policy of intransigeance. His activities produced widespread business unsettlement and contributed to the creation of a group of foes who characterized him as a corporate wrecker and business disturber.

Aside from his association with the Erie, Gould first instituted this policy in a major sense soon after he gained control of the Wabash. In one incident after another he took the aggressive. The rate depression in the Missouri Valley and in the Middle West was due in considerable degree to his policies. The invasion of southern Iowa by the Wabash in 1880; the construction by the Missouri Pacific of the line to Omaha in 1881; the ill-concealed extension into the Atchison territory in southern Kansas through the instrumentality of a partially controlled subsidiary; the invasion of the Leadville territory in Colorado through the Union Pacific; and the elaborate construction and expansion program in the Southwest—all contributed in the late eighties to the largest railroad-building program and to some of the most violent rate wars in American railroad history.

When Gould initiated his policy of rate-cutting and railroad construction in 1879, competitive railroad relationships in many parts of the country had become reasonably well stabilized. Gould broke up this stabilized rate and territorial structure. The eventual result was the construction of the Burlington's line to Denver, and the emergence of competition with the Union Pacific on transcontinental traffic. The rate wars that followed the Burlington invasion of the Union Pacific territory permanently reduced rates. The same results followed in eastern and central Kansas, where the Atchison eyed closely the Gould invasion of its lucrative traffic-producing country. The Gould aggression was partly responsible for the Atchison's counter-measures, primarily the construction of the Kansas City-Chicago extension and the transformation of the road into a new transcontinental system. Again, to use another example, the conflict of Gould with the Gulf was followed by the merger of that property with the Atchison. With the aid of additional construction in Oklahoma, this union produced a new competitive through route between the Missouri Valley and the Gulf Coast.

By reducing rates with apparent abandon as a means of achieving results, Gould impaired the fortunes not only of his competitors but also those of his own properties. Though the security holders of many roads may have lost, the public was a major gainer. The record building construction in 1879-81 and in 1886-87 were in part the consequence of competitive fears inspired by the Gould policies. Gould was in this sense a public servant. The building program in the eighties, of the Atchison, the Union Pacific, the Burlington, the Rock Island, the Northwestern, and the St. Paul, reflected to a considerable degree adjustments to his rate-cutting, business-disturbing policies.

Although in this sense Gould rendered a public service, he accomplished nothing in the raising of railroad service standards or in reducing costs. His roads during his lifetime and for two generations thereafter had an unsavory reputation. To the operating man accustomed to efficient car and train movements and to the shipper accustomed to expeditious deliveries, the Gould railroads were by no means a blessing. A Gould road in the Southwest was a byword for poor service. To the operating man and shipper the poor service of a Gould road was compared with the good service of the Atchison. Enough detail has been presented in preceding chapters to establish the conclusion that the Gould roads were poorly maintained; in fact usually drastically undermaintained. And an undermaintained railroad cannot render a high standard of service.

Neither did Gould introduce any mechanical improvements in the railroad industry nor for that matter in the telegraph industry. Gould was no inventor and had no mechanical ability; and unlike Westinghouse, for example, he made no contribution to the mechanical arts of the day. He had none of the driving genius for new and better things which characterized the activities of Rockefeller and Carnegie.

Having thus considered his accomplishments in one field, and his failings in another, attention must be directed now to another phase of his business activity in which the truth lies hidden in a complex business and financial organization. Gould throughout his life was attacked by group after group of security holders. From the beginning of his experience with the Erie it was his destiny to be associated with properties which had passed through receivership and reorganization. Except for the Union Pacific, and also for the Lackawanna in which he had only a minority interest, every major transportation property with which he became associated had a history of financial reverses. To an extent this was true even of the Union Pacific. Although the road had not gone through receivership prior to Gould control, the price of its securities had fallen to low levels and its original promoters after suffering heavy financial losses had lost control. The other properties prior to Gould control had either been in, or had narrowly escaped, receivership. The Kansas & Texas, the International, the Iron Mountain, the Texas & Pacific, the Denver, the Kansas Pacific, the Wabash, the Hannibal, and a number of smaller lines which were acquired by the larger properties were included in this category. Many of these roads after a number of years under Gould control drifted back into the receiverships from which they had so recently emerged. The drop in the market value of their securities which accompanied their financial embarrassment was usually laid to the evil genius of Gould. He was the scapegoat of the unsuccessful, as were the bankers and the utility magnates in the depression of the 1930's, and the Federal Reserve Board in 1920 and 1921.

To some extent this conclusion was justified. Gould in promoting rate wars and in invading local territories occupied by other railroads contributed to the financial difficulties of many roads and to that extent security holders were correct in ascribing their losses to Gould. The complaints of the losers were loud and long, and were registered in the daily press and in other organs of public opinion. They were also reflected in the documents presented before the courts and legislative committees by opponents of Gould and his policies. It is clear that losses were incurred and it is therefore easy to conclude that those who followed Gould lost money, and that the loss inflicted by the Gould policies represented a loss to the community.

This conclusion, however, does not represent the entire truth. To arrive at a conclusion reflecting financial and economic realities, it is essential to examine the source from which capital necessary for expansion in a dynamic capitalistic society is derived. The flow of capital into the production of goods and services necessary to meet consumer demands was only slightly affected in the seventies and eighties by governmental policies. The process of capital creation thus reflected the free play of economic influences. Gould operated largely in the railroad industry in which the demand for capital was exceptionally heavy. Except for a limited number of companies, the funds needed for the construction of new roads were secured by the sale of bonds and stocks. Funds were secured in part from individual and institutional savings. Such a source of capital creation is normal and this supply in conjunction with the demand for capital from borrowers produces what economists call a "natural" rate of interest. There are, however, other methods of creating purchasing power essential to capital formation. Expenditures by government for capital purposes out of the proceeds of bond issues sold to the banks became a normal feature in the 1930's and 1940's. Whatever objection there may be to this practice, the fact remains that billions of dollars of capital expenditures have been thus financed.

Purchasing power for capital improvements is also created by changes in capital values. The nature of these values and the extent to which they contribute to the growth of capital in a capitalistic economy should be properly appraised. Those who take the lead in creating capital from this source are frequently condemned as speculators or as the recipients of unearned gains. These profits are on occasion exceptionally large, although the losses under adverse economic conditions are even larger. Since the number who are successful in this phase of business are relatively few, there seems to be a presumption of inequity, or perhaps even of dishonesty, by those who are successful. This hypothesis may be a major reason for the failure to examine this problem adequately and to assess the contribution made by participants in this field of business to the public interest in a capitalistic economy.

A rise in the market value of assets consisting either of land and its improvements, or of stocks and bonds representing the capitalized earnings realized from the use of land and improvements thereon, produces an increase in the purchasing power of the holders of such property rights. Some of the holders may have bought such rights at one price level and held them throughout the period when they sold at a lower price level, awaiting their return to the original, higher cost level. To those people the increase in market value from the lower price level may represent no increase in purchasing power. There are others, however, who purchase securities at the low prices prevailing normally in a period of depression. It may be contended that the buyers gain only that amount which the sellers lose. This does not necessarily follow. Those who sell the securities have already made their contribution to the economic well-being of the community. The cash they paid for their securities or for other evidence of property rights has already been expended by the borrowers and transformed into capital. The capital exists in the form of railroads, telephone, telegraph, machines, or tools which are creating services for the consumer. The new security purchasers make additional commitments. Their investments are not transformed immediately into capital formation. Such investments transfer purchasing power to the original holders, who have now become sellers. To determine the economic benefits to the community coming from the increased capital values, it is essential to consider the disposition made of these greater values on the part of buyers. If the buyers hold the securities through the rising capital market; if, that is to say, they never sell the securities they have made no important contribution to the public welfare.

The buyers of the securities at the depression-made low prices may, however, sell their securities at the high capital values established in the boom era. When the securities are converted into cash, the purchasing power of the holders is correspondingly increased. If that purchasing power is then transferred to those businessmen who are active producers for transformation into capital goods, then a substantial economic benefit has been realized. If the holders sell their securities at high prices and use the proceeds to buy new securities directly from the corporations which use the cash to install capital improvements, the productive wealth of the community is increased.

Those who buy and sell such securities in periods of low and high prices, respectively, are frequently described as speculators or as suppliers of "equity" capital. The first is a questionable and the second a praiseworthy description of the functions of the role of this kind of capital creator in the period of recovery from a general depression. It is then generally recognized that fixed charges have become too heavy for many corporations to carry. What is needed under these conditions, it is therefore contended, is capital which carries no interest charges. In the later stages of cyclical recovery, in the midst of an economic boom, the services of the supplier of equity capital are not so generally recognized since by that time funds for capital needs are relatively easy to obtain. Conservative people, particularly those representing financial institutions such as banks and insurance companies, stimulated as they are by a record of good earnings over a period of years, are willing to provide capital yielding low returns. This is especially true if such returns are fixed contractually in terms of dollars. The borrowing corporations in turn are desirous of making such contracts. They can thereby make substantial profits from the difference between the interest paid and the profits expected to be realized from the use of the borrowed funds. Those who buy stocks at high prices in the latter stages of a boom and who lose part of their capital are frequently described as speculators; while those who buy at low depression prices and sell at the high boom prices are frequently described as investors. Ordinarily those who have not bought the securities at the low depression prices are so impressed by the record of boom-time earnings, presumably so well established as to insure their indefinite continuance, that they are led to buy the securities at the higher boom prices.

Those who followed Gould in the purchase of securities at the low depression-born prices and in the early period of recovery, made exceptional profits. It is perhaps not so clear, however, that those who made these gains were not so voluble in their praise as were those who were so expansive in seeking a scapegoat for their losses. Gould above all was a leader in the field of speculative capital and in this phase of business activity he performed a service to society. It was also in this field that he made his greatest personal gains and contributed most to the public weal. In this field he did not, however, realize the maximum potential gains. He made many mistakes, as do most businessmen in this and other fields. In the early recovery from the depression lows of 1877 he was on the wrong side of the market and his short sales produced heavy personal losses. After the successful resumption of specie payments in January, 1879, he changed his mind. He financed his early buying ventures by the sale of a substantial block of Union Pacific stock to the Sage-Keene syndicate. His purchases in the spring and summer of 1879 of the Kansas Pacific, Wabash and other securities, which he bought at an accelerated tempo, have been examined. In his buying program, it is an established fact that Gould had a large following. Sage, Humphreys, (S.) Dillon, Field, Tilden, G. M. Pullman, Marquand, J. S. Seligman, Keene, Woerishoffer, Sloan, T. A. Scott, W. L. Scott and Hopkins, among many others, participated with him in the purchase of securities at depression prices. Each of these capitalists had his own following, and though it is not possible to establish the extent of the group that followed his leadership, it is a reasonable assertion that their numbers could be counted in the thousands.[^2]

Gould also had a following abroad, particularly in Holland, where his purchase of Denver & Pacific bonds in the summer of 1879 created a favorable impression among capitalists. As early as 1875, his leadership in reversing market trends by using Union Pacific stock as a vehicle, created much good feeling there.[^3]

Aside from the Union Pacific stock, the securities which Gould purchased on a large scale in 1879 and 1880 had little investment following. Although the roads responsible for the issue of these securities were strategic from the standpoint of their importance to the economic life of the community, they had yielded slight returns to the original investors. Since they were financially weak, their properties were in poor physical condition. It is therefore not surprising that conservative capitalists, such for example as Forbes, referred to these properties contemptuously as the "broken-down" railroads. The prices of these securities were exceptionally low. Gould's market judgment in 1879 and 1880 was excellent, and those who followed his lead realized substantial profits. It is of more than passing significance to observe that those capitalists who were associated with Gould in these two luscious years were not among his bitter critics. Among his followers during this period were a number, Woerishoffer for example, who later disagreed with him on the problems of market trading. Woerishoffer gained and Gould lost in the panic markets of May, 1884, whereas Gould profited and Woerishoffer lost by reason of Gould's sale of his Denver stock and the failure of Woerishoffer to sell his in the booming markets of 1881. Neither man condemned the other because of his market losses.

With a view of presenting a picture of the market appreciation of the securities in which Gould and his army of followers were interested, the following table, "Market Values of Stocks in Gould Properties, 1879-1881," was prepared.

### Notes to Table I

1. Early in 1879 Central Branch Union Pacific stock had no value. At that time an official of the Burlington was unable to secure a quotation for the bonds of the Central Branch. See Burlington archives, Tyson to Perkins, Jan. 9, 1879. The price of $10 per share is therefore reasonable.
2. This is the price per share paid by Gould for 6,250 shares, according to testimony before the Pacific Railway Commission. See Executive Document No. 51, 50th Congress, 1st Session, 1887, p. 663.
3. This is the price per share paid to Keene by Gould for the stock of the Central of New Jersey early in 1881, according to Chicago Tribune, Jan. 12, 1882.
4. This average price does not include September, 1881, when, as the result of a corner, the price of the common stock reached a high of $350 per share.
5. This is the average of the high and low prices for July, 1881.
6. This is the average of the high and low prices for October, 1881, when Gould bought most of his Manhattan Elevated.
7. The price per share is based on the reported price (never confirmed by the participants) paid by Gould to Commodore Garrison for the latter's holdings of Missouri Pacific. It is assumed that this price covered the purchase of the entire 8,000 shares outstanding; though in view of the small minority interest, the price is not entirely accurate.
8. The price of $5 a share for International Great Northern is assumed, since no market price for 1879 has been found. Inasmuch as the property was sold at auction in July 1879, the price of $5 a share probably overestimates its market value.
9. By the end of 1881, 164,700 shares of Missouri, Kansas & Texas had been issued for 82,350 shares of International Great Northern stock on the basis of the exchange of two shares of the former for one share of the latter. Hence the value of the International Great Northern's stock by the end of 1881 was reflected in the value of the stock of the Missouri, Kansas & Texas.
10. Of the 399,714 shares of Missouri, Kansas & Texas outstanding by the end of 1881, 378,750 represent the shares equal to its own 214,050 shares outstanding on December 31, 1878; and the 164,700 shares issued for 82,350 of International Great Northern. The remaining 20,964 shares were issued by construction companies for the building of new mileage. The large capital gains realized from the stocks for the construction companies are not reflected in this tabulation.
11. This is the price per share paid to Messrs. Allen and Marquand by Gould in December, 1880, according to R. R. Gaz., Dec. 17, 1880, 678.
12. Number of shares outstanding on December 31, 1880.
13. Since almost all of the St. Louis, Iron Mountain & Southern's stock had been exchanged for the stock of the Missouri Pacific by December 31, 1881, the market value for 1881 is reflected in the market value of the Missouri Pacific.
14. The price of $10 a share for Texas & Pacific is assumed. No market quotation for 1879 has been found. Since the company's financial condition approximated that of the Missouri, Kansas & Texas, whose stock sold at a low of 5%, a price of $10 for Texas & Pacific stock is probably a fair reflection of its value early in 1879.
15. This is the number of shares outstanding on June 30, 1882, since the fiscal year ended on that date.
16. 504,522 shares of Union Pacific on December 31, 1881, were issued for the shares of the old Union Pacific, Kansas Pacific and Denver Pacific. There were actually outstanding 507,623 shares; the balance of 3,101 shares reflect some minor adjustments.
17. The 40,000 shares of Denver Pacific had no value in 1879 in the opinion of the Pacific Railway Commission. The five-dollar nominal value assigned to this stock is undoubtedly in excess of its market value.
18. The 200,000 shares each of Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific common and preferred were exchanged for the Wabash common and the St. Louis, Kansas City & Northern common and preferred. There were actually outstanding on December 31, 1881, a total of 269,210 shares of common and 230,332 shares of preferred of the Wabash, St. Louis & Pacific. The additional 69,210 and 30,332 shares of common and of preferred, respectively, were exchanged for the securities of other companies—mostly in connection with the reorganization of companies in receivership. The appreciation in the market value of these receivership securities through their exchange for the shares of the Wabash is thus not included in this table.
19. This is the monthly average of the high and low prices of Western Union Telegraph stock for the last six months of 1880. Although Gould had traded in the stock since 1875—and perhaps earlier—he was not closely associated with it as a buyer for purposes of acquiring control until the summer of 1880.
20. Number of shares outstanding June 30, 1880.
21. The increased number of shares reflects the stock created in consequence of the merger in 1881 of the Western Union Telegraph with the American Union Telegraph and the Atlantic & Pacific Telegraph companies. To a slight but indeterminate degree the stocks of the latter two telegraph companies represent some cost to the holders who exchanged them for the Western Union Telegraph stock; and to this extent the market appreciation of Western Union Telegraph is exaggerated.

This table is by no means accurate or all-inclusive. It does, however, indicate the shape and trend of things in the depressed markets in the spring of 1879 as compared with the boom markets in 1881. The table compares the low price registered in 1879 generally prevailing in the spring months of the year when Gould began his buying program, and an average of the 1881 prices. The high prices of 1881 with some exceptions were not duplicated for a twenty-one-year period.

This tabular compilation bristles with hypotheses. Almost every figure can be challenged. It is obviously incorrect to assume that Gould or any of his followers bought a large part of the stocks at the lowest prices prevailing in 1879, and it is of course equally inaccurate to assume that all of the stocks were sold by Gould or his followers at the high 1881 prices. If there is a margin of error which leads to the exaggeration of the appreciation in the market value of securities in this period, it is probably more than adequately balanced by the profits realized by the Gould-following in many securities that are not included in the tabulation. Such omissions embrace the appreciation in the stock of the Denver, in the junior bonds of the Kansas Pacific and the Wabash, and of the numerous small roads that were embraced in the latter system. Nor does the compilation reflect the gains realized from the activities of the construction companies. Although the Lackawanna was not, strictly speaking, a Gould property, it is nevertheless true that Gould and many in his group realized large profits from trading in that stock. One of the most stable security values created through the Gould leadership—that of the various corporations involved in the St. Louis terminal area—is ignored. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that this table reflects fairly the increase in the market value of the securities of the Gould railroads in the boom period between 1879 and 1881.

In these years, characterized by a rapid expansion in the nation's productive plant, thousands of miles of railroads were built by the Gould roads. Few of these properties enjoyed a high credit rating. They therefore had to finance their needs in the speculative markets. Gould was a leader in this field, and hundreds of communities owed their early facilities to his speculative leadership. A substantial portion of the speculative funds employed in the building of new lines came from those who had reaped capital gains from the purchase and sale of Gould securities. The reorganization of the Texas & Pacific in the mid-eighties, for example, disclosed the large number of Pennsylvania citizens who followed the lead of Scott and Gould in the purchase of its securities. Tilden, Marquand, Field, and Sage were heavy buyers of securities sold to finance railroad construction. The volume of Gould railroad mileage built during the first part of the boom of the eighties was by no means inconsiderable. Taking the four-year period of 1879-82, inclusive, as a basis for study, the new mileage built by the Wabash-Kansas & Texas-Missouri Pacific-Iron Mountain-International-Texas & Pacific-and Union Pacific systems (excluding the Lackawanna, where the building of the Buffalo extension was also financed to a great extent by capital of Gould and his following) amounted to 4,231.29 (See Table II). Assuming a cost of $20,000 per mile, probably on the low side in the strong commodity markets in the early eighties, this construction involved an investment of $84,620,000.

### Table II  
Miles of Road Built by Gould Railroads 1879-1882  
(Excludes construction in Republic of Mexico)

1. Texas Pacific . 1,010.00  
2. Union Pacific . 1,249.87  
3. Wabash . 462.01  
4. International Great Northern . 256.71  
5. Missouri Kansas & Texas . 588.2  
6. Missouri Pacific . 466.5  
7. St. Louis Iron Mountain & Southern . 198.0  
Total: 4,231.29  

*Note: The mileage of the first three roads is based on letters from these companies. The mileage of the last four is based on data in Poor's Manual of Railroads.*

A substantial part of the funds invested in the stocks (and bonds) of the Gould railroads in the early eighties was later lost. Similar losses flowing from investment in state government bonds sold to finance public works in a boom period were incurred in the wake of the panic of 1837, and far more extensive losses were inflicted from time to time by default and repudiation of European governments as the result of disastrous wars and even more disastrous peace treaties. There is, however, a notable difference between the nature and the distribution of the losses from private securities as contrasted with those from government securities. Risks in the former group are assumed and losses absorbed by the investor. Except for government subsidies, the investor cannot transfer the loss to any other group; he assumes the risk and either takes the profits or absorbs the loss. Losses arising from improper financing of government needs, however, are usually taken by the taxpayer. It is only in the event of the destruction of the government or of a breakdown in the economy, that the investor is forced to take the loss either in the form of default or repudiation, or in the guise of a worthless currency in which the debt is repaid.

Except for the destruction of a country's economy, or the devaluation of its currency, the issues of government bonds for nonproductive purposes thus remain a permanent liability upon the community. Bonds issued by corporations on the other hand are reduced or eliminated in the course of time as the unprofitable character of the capital in which the funds have been committed is revealed. So it was with many of the bonds of the Gould-controlled railroads—the Wabash, the Kansas & Texas, the International, and the Texas & Pacific during the lifetime of Gould, and those of the Missouri Pacific after his death. Some of the bonds were exchanged for stock. No longer was the public taxed to finance the payment of interest on an unproductive debt. The unproductivity of the debt in many cases was the result not of the economic disutility of the capital, but rather of the decline in railroad rates. That is to say, the unfortunate investment made by the bondholder gave the public a railroad facility at a low price. It was the combination of fixed capital which could be converted to no other use and of depressed rates that frequently undermined the safety of the investment. The security holders, followers of Gould, who sold at the top prices of 1881 realized good capital gains. Those who reinvested such gains in the Gould railroads eventually lost part. Distribution of profits and losses among Gould followers was highly unequal. While Sage for example invested a major part of his profits in railroad bonds which maintained their value even in depression, Field invested his in the stock of the Manhattan Elevated at high prices. His loss was fatal.

Whatever the loss of the followers of Gould and to Gould himself, the public benefited from his activities as a man of business in the railroad industry and in the field of speculative capital. As a leader in the railroad industry he built many new roads; he broke down local territorial monopolies, destroyed traffic pools, and wrecked railroad rate structures. As a leader in the arena of speculative capital, he transformed millions of dollars of paper profits into productive wealth in the form of new railroads. Gould made fortunes for many of his followers, and produced losses for others. What his followers in the security markets gained, many did not permanently retain. The public did gain permanently, so far as anything permanent can be assumed to exist in economic life. Through the use of funds obtained from speculative followers and which could not have been obtained from investors, he built many new railroads. At the same time, in the process of disturbing existing business values, he reduced permanently the price of railroad service. To Gould, as much as to any other single business leader, goes the credit for that far-reaching reduction in rates that characterized the growth of the American economy in the generation after the Civil War.

---

## Notes for Chapter XXX

[^1]: Burlington archives, Harris to W. W. Murphy, April 23, 1877.
[^2]: An example of an individual investor who profited by following Gould's leadership is furnished by a New York surrogate who said publicly that Gould told him to buy Union Pacific stock at 40, after which the price rose rapidly; and that, through the advice of Sweeny, one of Gould's political followers, he profited also from the purchase of the stock of the Cleveland & Pittsburgh. Wall Street News, March 15, 1882.
[^3]: Ry. Review, June 12, 1875, 118.